Critical Legal Examination of Liberalism and Liberal Rights
Matthew McManus

palgrave macmillan
Palgrave Studies in Classical Liberalism
Series Editors
David F. Hardwick Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine The University of British Columbia Vancouver, BC, Canada
Leslie Marsh

Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine The University of British Columbia Vancouver, BC, Canada
This series offers a forum to writers concerned that the central presuppositions of the liberal tradition have been severely corroded, neglected, or misappropriated by overly rationalistic and constructivist approaches.
The hardest-won achievement of the liberal tradition has been the wrestling of epistemic independence from overwhelming concentrations of power, monopolies and capricious zealotries. The very precondition of knowledge is the exploitation of the epistemic virtues accorded by society’s situated and distributed manifold of spontaneous orders, the DNA of the modern civil condition.
With the confluence of interest in situated and distributed liberalism emanating from the Scottish tradition, Austrian and behavioral economics, non-Cartesian philosophy and moral psychology, the editors are soliciting proposals that speak to this multidisciplinary constituency. Sole or joint authorship submissions are welcome as are edited collections, broadly theoretical or topical in nature.
More information about this series at http://www.palgrave.com/gp/series/15722

Matthew McManus
A Critical Legal Examination of Liberalism and Liberal Rights
palgrave
macmillan

Matthew McManus Political Science
Monterrey Institute of Technology and Hi Mexico, Estado de Mexico, Mexico
ISSN 2662-6470	ISSN 2662-6489 (electronic)
Palgrave Studies in Classical Liberalism
ISBN 978-3-030-61024-1	ISBN 978-3-030-61025-8 (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61025-8

© Editor(s) (if applicable) and Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Cover illustration: © Pattadis Walarput/Alamy Stock Photo
This Palgrave Macmillan imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG. The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland
Dedicated to my parents Jean and John with a great deal oflove and appreciation
Acknowledgements
This book had been planned and conceived for some time before the opportunity came to write it. Unlike my earlier monographs on postmodern conservatism, A Critical Legal Examination of Liberalism and Liberal Rights didn’t emerge from an effort to understand a shocking and vividly historical development in the early twenty-first century. My engagement with human rights goes back decades, to when I first attended the Canadian Council of International Law conference with my father as a teenager. Since then I’ve been engaged in human rights activism with Amnesty International and NGOS such as the Committee for International Justice and Accountability, completed degrees with “human rights” in the name, all while writing and talking about rights. This fascination with rights discourse juxtaposed sharply with my ambitions to be a critical legal scholar, given the long history of that profession’s hostility towards rights which goes back at least to Karl Marx.
My interest in critical legal theory and analysis began during an undergraduate degree at Carleton University, where I was fortunate to have several very good teachers who fostered my eclectic array of interests while helping to give them focus. This book aspires to make a small contribution to rejuvenating the classical critical legal tradition, which since the 1980s has splintered into a number of different traditions which analyze liberal rights and legalism from the standpoint of what David Harvey
vii
viii Acknowledgements
would call “militant particularism.” Many of these traditions are highly interesting and valuable from a progressive standpoint. But each is limited by its reliance on philosophical positions which exclusively emphasize critique while being hesitant to accept what Rawls would call the burdens of moral judgement entailed by normative theorizing. A Critical Legal Examination of Liberalism and Liberal Rights seeks to avoid these problems by not only engaging in critique, but showcasing how rights can be reconceived along more emancipatory lines by conceptually dissociating them from limits of the liberal tradition. If successful it will help reconcile rights with critical legal theory in a manner one does not see / no longer sees in the classical Crit tradition.
Any book is the product of more debts than an author can possibly pay. I’d like to start by thanking my undergraduate professors at Carleton University, Ottawa: Dr. Trevor Purvis, Dr. Amy Bartholomew, Dr. Ratna Balasubramaniam, and Margie McDougall for their inspiration. I’d also like to thank Dr. Kathleen Cavanaugh Lecturer of International Law at the Irish Centre for Human Rights, Galway for her insights and support while I was engaged in my LL,M. studies there, and for her invaluable ongoing mentorship. Many people at York University helped me think through the issue of rights and critical legal theory during my Ph.D. studies. These include my supervisor Dr. Lesley Jacobs, and Dr. Annie Bunting and Dr. Amanda Glasbeek, Dr. Jay Goulding for his friendship, and my committee members Dr. Allan Hutchinson and Dr. Willem Maas. I would also like to thank all my friends at York, many of whom have collaborated with me in publications, webinars and on-line lectures over the years. This includes Dylan De Jong, Heather Tasker, Ali Malik, Emily Lockheart, Mark Terry, Erik Tate, Chris Satoor, Daniel Huizenga, and Victor Hainagiu. Thank you to the Committee for International Justice and Accountability and Tec de Monterrey for their support after graduation. Special thanks to our Department Director at Tec, Dr. Juan Cruz, for his unflagging patience and kindness. And of course to all the students in our Department who I’ve learnt from over my time in Mexico at Tec de Monterrey. Special thanks to Whitman College for hiring me as I finished writing the book.
Friends and colleagues were always important while writing this. Shefali Sarna and Stacey Freeman are old friends who’ve always tolerated
Acknowledgements	ix
many ups and downs throughout the academic process with good advice and humor. Grant Dingwall, Nicholas Young, James Bowden, Aaron Frankruyter, Jeffrey Farncombe and I go way back and have always been a reliable presence. Thank you to Taewook Kim and Nolan Belleville for their friendship since childhood. And thank you to Andrew Thorndyke, David Hollands, Justin Unsworth, William Norman and Hilary Buchan-Terrell, Tristan Bradley, Lee Doucet, Jack Poldrugovac, Brendan Nickels, and Lorne Williams for many incredible memories. Of course Victor Bruzzone deserves many thanks for his work on the Introduction to this book, which added greatly to the text and challenged my own interpretation of its essential points. My colleagues and collaborators at Zero Books have been a constant source of helpful critique and self-examination. Thank you to Douglas Lain, Ben Burgis, Conrad Hamilton, and Greg Tallion for their help. Much admiration for Helen Pluckrose, Erich Prince, and other editors who have published my work along the way. Short sections of this book were published early on in these venues, providing useful feedback for the final product. And of course thank you to Leslie Marsh and Brendan George at Palgrave Macmillan for the professional advice and ceaseless drive to make sure the book was up to standards. Lastly, thank you to Connor O’Callaghan, who passed away several years ago but remains very missed by those who loved him.
Lastly thank you very much to my extended family; both the McManuses and McLeods in Canada and abroad. The Trejo family in Mexico have been a source of companionship and insight while living there. Loki, Meaghan, Emily, Adam, Chris, Matt, Kayla, Nick and Finnegan all deserve warm appreciation. I would never have completed the text without assistance from my wife Marion Trejo, who was always patient in dealing with the absent mindedness and frustrations that come with undertaking any large-scale project. Finally thank you to my parents, to whom this is dedicated. There is no doubt I would never have written anything had it not been for their help from the beginning.

Contents

Part I Liberalism and Its Critics 1
	1 Liberal Rights and Their Critics 3
	2 Critics of Liberal Rights 67
	3 The Limitations of Liberalism and Liberal Rights 137

Part II A Critical Legal Approach to Dignity, Law, and Rights 167
	4 Dignified Self-Authorship and a Critical Legal Model of Rights 169
	5 Rethinking the Ontology of Law and Rights on Critical

Legal Lines 223
Bibliography 263
Index 287
xi
Introduction by Victor Bruzzone: Liberalism and Its Discontents
Liberalism, broadly construed, is based on the idea that we ought to build an arrangement that minimizes the coercive burden that governments have historically placed on citizens, partially in response to historical feudalism and other regime types. Liberalism does this by enhancing citizen freedom through fundamental rights. However, in recent years, this idea has come under serious attack from the left and right. This book functions as a response to these attacks. The main aim of the book is to offer a modified view of liberal rights that effectively responds to many of the most powerful criticisms of liberalism. What Matt McManus offers is a view of liberalism and liberal rights inspired by ideas in critical-legal scholarship grounded in a reconceptualized view of dignity. Specifically, McManus bases his view of dignity on something he calls self-authorship rooted in our expressive capacities as human beings. That is, our dignity is secured based on the extent to which we are able to exercise our expressive capacities.
The ambition of such a task is clear and admirable. As I will discuss below, any defence or elaboration of liberalism must confront what I see as the central dilemma when attempting to identify a theory of justice. This is especially evident when we consider the growth of a new reactionary right taking hold in previously liberal democratic countries, like Hungary, Brazil, and arguably the United States. The main grievance
xiii
xiv Introduction by Victor Bruzzone: Liberalism and Its Discontents
from supporters of these developments is the tendency of liberalism to remain neutral on any particular cultural tradition or value pattern. Perhaps more accurately, liberalism’s attempt to remain neutral actually leads it to favour an individualistic and selfish consumerist mindset. What gets lost is the value of long-standing traditions like family and religious observance. This is why a self-described “illiberal democracy” like Hungary, built on the slogan of “keeping Hungary Hungarian” began to shift its policies to privilege the family. Indeed, in Hungary, a (heterosexual) family is heavily incentivized to have children including generous tax credits and other benefits.1
Liberal Neutrality and Culture
The reason a liberal might object to policies of the type Hungary has adopted is based on the idea that the state should stay neutral on the question of worthiness of certain forms of life, whether to have a family, or not. But this is the precise consequence of neutrality that those on the illiberal right object to. Neutrality leads to an unavoidable preference for individual freedom and utility maximization over a duty to the community or values about something that transcends our individual interest. But the liberal will insist that the price of having a state affirm any one way of living over another sends an unacceptable message. That is, that to be a true citizen of a country requires that they value some specific cultural practice and devalue others. This is, after all, one of the main motivations behind the cherished liberal value of separation of church and state—to stay neutral so citizens can make up their own mind and minimize social animus.
Another important contextual consideration is that in recent years the nominal left has adopted a habit of identifying (often correctly) the ways in which regimes based on liberal rights are failing to live up to their promise of equal treatment and opportunity. For example, the #metoo
1 Shaun Walker, “‘Baby Machines’: Eastern Europe’s Answer to Depopulation,” The Guardian, March 4, 2020, sec. World news, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/mar/04/baby-bonuses-fit-the-nationalist-agenda-but-do-they-work.
Introduction by Victor Bruzzone: Liberalism and Its Discontents
xv
movement has highlighted the everyday humiliations felt by women suffering from subtle (and sometimes not so subtle) forms of sexual harassment in the workplace. Similarly, many examples of subtle racism have been identified by movements like Black Lives Matter point to a similar shortfall. These failures occur even though liberal democratic regimes have enshrined equal rights to all individuals in the laws and constitutions of liberal democracy. Thus, something important about the way the culture functions at the everyday level fails to be addressed by liberal rights. This is especially notable when we consider the fact that many of the more subtle forms of harassment or racism are not severe enough to reach a point of criminality, they may be closer to a severe form of impoliteness. Yet still, few would argue they do not hold us back from reaching a more just society.
Of course, the left is also concerned with the consequences of neutrality inasmuch as it leads to individualistic and selfish consumerism. Indeed, communitarians have long complained about liberalism’s inability to secure a strong and cooperative civic culture. It is also worth noticing that some streams of critical theory that focus on non-Western thought make observations similar to right-wing critics concerned with the degradation of culture and tradition, though from a different point of view. For example, Vanessa Watts traces the consequences of colonialism on indigenous cultures that leads to the loss of what she terms “indigenous place-thought”—a view that extends agency beyond the human being.2 The leftist appeal to subaltern groups makes sense from the perspective of a concern about the individualist consequences of liberalism. This is because subaltern groups are sometimes seen as one way of locating an alternative to individualistic liberalism. More than that, indigenous cultures (along with other subaltern groups) are seen as actually having a thick culture of existential meaning instead of the individualism of liberalism.
2 Vanessa Watts, “Indigenous Place-Thought and Agency Amongst Humans and Non Humans,” Decolonization: Indigeneity, Education & Society 2, no 1 (April 2013): 20—34
xvi	Introduction	by Victor Bruzzone: Liberalism and Its Discontents
The Liberal Zero-Sum Dilemma
The discussion up to this point brings me to the precise dilemma that is so relevant to McManus’ book. The dilemma, it seems to me, is between life-affirming meaning structures and neutrally applied justice. This is the puzzle of the contemporary moment—how to have a regime that offers a universal (and as impartial as possible) framework of justice but does not degrade a sense that society offers citizens existentially satisfying meaning structures. The problem, as I have been attempting to develop, is that many on both the right and left have noticed the way liberalism, and its tendency for neutrality, does not really foster existentially satisfying meaning structures at all. Moreover, in the case of leftist critiques of liberalism, it is not even very good at addressing injustices at the level of subtle conduct related to everyday cultural value patterns. Movements like #metoo and Black Lives Matters has done some work to demonstrate these. Addressing these kinds of injustices are, of course, related to the cultural concern. After all, norms that follow from everyday value patterns are, at least to some extent, a consequence of culture.
I would argue that the worry that liberalism cannot secure existential value, and consequently may be under threat, is in large part derivative of the above concerns. From the perspective of the right, it seems like the more we universally apply negative rights, the less people will feel inclined toward some duty to their community or larger traditions (evidenced in a decline in the family and church). This is because neutrality and negative liberties do not expect anything of citizens—they only demand that citizens refrain from certain behaviors that are harmful to others. If you go the other way, and institute some form of traditional duty or expectation on citizens you threaten to leave those that do not fit with the overarching values on the margins. In this book, McManus also worries about marginalizing a portion of the population, but his remedy is to emphasize dignity as the extent to which a society amplifies capacities for selfauthorship instead of strict liberty.
For the traditional liberal, the idea that people who choose not to do their cultural or civic duty can become social outcasts is totally
Introduction by Victor Bruzzone: Liberalism and Its Discontents xvii
unacceptable based on the idea that a state should permit complete individual freedom provided this conduct does not harm others (along the lines of Mill’s harm principle). This is exactly the problem Isaiah Berlin identified in his famous essay Two Concepts of Liberty. As Berlin explains, the dream of an “organic social whole” that instills the healthiest duties in its citizenry is a hop and skip away from authoritarianism.3 Indeed, a duty enshrined in a culture could very easily imply coercive enforcement (as history shows).
From a left-wing perspective, views based around democratic engagement also seem to run up against liberal neutrality because of the expectation they place on citizens to participate. For instance, some radical democrats argue that the most important practice is to develop a kind of highly engaged citizen. Such values have been tested during protest movements like Occupy, a process that requires horizontal participation. Some radical leftists imagine a community of highly politically mobilized citizens in a perpetual process of locally organized self-rule. Again however, this raises the question of how to get citizens to participate meaningfully (just voting is not fostering a thick civic culture). If it requires coercive force, it may be unacceptable to the liberal.
Another suggestion for achieving existential value among some leftist political theorists is to incorporate practices that are derived from subaltern groups. However, I sometimes suspect that many critical scholars that appeal to traditional practices of indigenous peoples or other subaltern groups take for granted that applying these traditions will easily preserve the liberal values already enjoyed. But I do not think this is necessarily obvious. Many subaltern cultures contain practices most with progressive views would find unacceptable (i.e. some traditional gender roles, hierarchies of rule).
Therefore, to put this very simply, it could appear as though we are left with a zero-sum game. Option one is that we build a society around thick meaning structures (in either left or right versions) but sacrifice the neutrality of liberal rights. Indeed, under such circumstances, our positive commitment to the social values of the society (whether
3 Isaiah Berlin. Four Essays on Liberty. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1969).
xviii
Introduction by Victor Bruzzone: Liberalism and Its Discontents
participation, the Church, or cultural tradition etc.) take priority over our individual freedom. Those unable to fit within these social values risk becoming marginalized, since they threaten the very conditions that provide for the feeling of thick existential meaning—doing our duty to the society.
Option two is that we steadfastly hold to liberal values and attempt to correct as many socio-economic ills as possible. However, the result is that those concerned with thick existential meaning will complain that it continues to corrode. This brings to mind the political psychology research, often cited by Vox’s Ezra Klein, linking personality traits with political ideology. The idea being, conservatives tend to fear change, liberals are predisposed to openness to change (even excited by the new and novel).4 Uus, we might argue that the very appeal of thick meaning structures is that they are a vehicle for stabilizing the world, acting as an insurance policy against unexpected changes to the social fabric. A world of individualist liberalism is a world in flux, totally troubling to the conservative personality type.
If we accept the political psychology research, then we can pose the basic question as how to reconcile between the two broad human types. If the dilemma I discussed above is indeed zero-sum, then perhaps reconciliation is not fully possible. However, perhaps this is not a zero-sum dilemma. Perhaps there is a middle way. I read McManus’ book as entering this conversation. His account of a set of rights that secure dignified self-authorship is meant to be a way of speaking to this dilemma, at least indirectly. As McManus’ answer is not focused directly on the dilemma, but it does offer an account of a process the makes life meaningful; selfauthorship. However, it also still leaves significant unanswered questions. Specifically, many questions are raised as a result of the role democratic engagement plays in his account of a meaningful life.
4 Ezra Klein, “Why Are Liberals More Afraid of the Coronavirus than Conservatives?,” News, Vox (blog), May 21, 2020, https://www.vox.eom/2020/5/21/21262329/coronavirus-liberals-conser vatives-polls-afraid-psychology-distacing.
Introduction by Victor Bruzzone: Liberalism and Its Discontents xix
Toward Dignified Self-Authorship
This book is composed of five chapters, divided into two main parts. The first part deals with the history of liberalism and the many criticisms it has faced. Chapter 1 examines the development of rights including its growth through the thinking of Thomas Hobbes through to John Stuart Mill, and its more recent developments. McManus emphasizes how the turn of the century was a very significant moment for liberalism. That is, liberalism had purportedly defeated its two chief rivals, fascism and communism, only to find itself embattled once again with the rise of illiberal regimes like the ones found in 2020 Hungary and Brazil. These new reactionary regimes are based on a tendency McManus refers to as “postmodern conservatism”—the view that illiberal ideas no longer need to root themselves in “eternal truths” but can merely assert themselves through the exertion of a kind of ‘will to power’.
Chapter 2 examines the main critiques of liberalism and liberal rights. Figures examined include Rousseau, Burke, Marx, Schimitt, Deneen, and Hazony, among others. Overall, liberalism is criticized from the left for not going far enough, erasing difference within particular cultures, and in some cases actually concealing structures of oppression. McManus concludes Part One of the book by identifying what he sees as the main limits of liberalism and liberal rights, limits that follow from the major critiques he reviews. The first is the tendency of liberalism to tolerate inequalities because it typically includes a very strong defence of property rights. As McManus will note, this tendency has been addressed relatively well by those in the egalitarian liberal tradition, most notable in John Rawls’ justice as fairness. The second, less often addressed limit to liberalism is its tendency to be suspicious of greater participation and democracy. That is, liberalism tends to prioritize constitutional rules, such as fundamental rights, over democratic will. As McManus points out, traditional liberals tend to be very wary of a conflict between democratic will and constitutional rules. Finally, McManus acknowledges the cultural limitations of liberalism related to its emphasis on what some would call “possessive individualism.” Thus, McManus’ main goal in Part Two of the
xx
Introduction by Victor Bruzzone: Liberalism and Its Discontents
book is to offer an account of liberal rights that addresses these limitations.
McManus’ own critical-legal approach to liberal rights builds on the claim that human dignity can be located in the opportunity for selfauthorship through the use of expressive capacities. In the final parts of the book, McManus develops his “twinned model” of basic rights related to his account of dignity. For McManus, dignity is rooted in “our overall capacity for self-authorship.” Humans achieve dignity by participating in processes and activities that redefine the world around them. The twinned rights McManus proposes are meant to secure the conditions for self-authorship.
The rights can be summarized as the following. Citizens should have a right to democratic and individual self-authorship. This includes typical negative liberties, something uncontroversial among liberals, along with the less often included call for increased democratization. That is, citizens should “determine the laws and direction of institutions who govern them.” The second right is that citizens should enjoy equality of expressive capacities. What this implies is that a society must ensure, perhaps through policies related to social provisions as well as a strong civic culture, that citizens have all the necessary tools to sufficiently develop their life according to dignified self-authorship.
The way this account could be said to be speaking to the dilemma I discussed earlier is that these rights are not neutral on the existential question of what it means to live the good life. On my reading, the twinned rights are meant to reinforce each other. This is why, as you will see in the forthcoming pages, democratic self-authorship is so important. McManus’ account depends on some form of collective democratic agency. The rules and institutions that citizens live by are open to continuous democratic revision, insofar as that revision is based on the twinned rights. The process of democratic self-authorship reinforces the public value of each citizens’ expressive capacities, while the process of ensuring and enhancing expressive capacities leads to enhanced democratic self-authorship, and ultimately a more cohesive and just public culture—at least, this is the hope.
Introduction by Victor Bruzzone: Liberalism and Its Discontents xxi
Civic Culture and the Duty to Participate
The above is reminiscent of what Josiah Ober argues is the main benefit of building a civic culture on democratic participation. As Ober argues “because participation in democratic culture and institutions requires the reiterated and active exercise, at scale, of reason and communication to achieve social ends, the practice of democracy refines, broadens, and deepens inherent human capacities”.5 However, in this book, and in Ober’s view, an important puzzle remains. That is, what duty do citizens have to participate? From the perspective of rational interest versus existential interest (if such a distinction could be made), there might be an argument to be made that democratic participation could be in a human’s rational interest (in that it is a vehicle for securing the fairest distribution of resources). But is it addressing the existential deficits that critics of liberalism point out? That is, can a civic culture based on participation satisfy the conservative human type? This may depend on the extent to which a democratic civic culture is experienced as somehow stable and transcendent.
There is a fairly long history of egalitarian political theorists assuming that their theory of justice will lead to a kind of thick civic culture. We can find evidence of this in Rawls’ Political Liberalism when he argues that publicly affirming the principles of justice will foster a kind of publi-cally affirmed social cooperation, something he argues would lead to confidence and some form of civic participation.6 Carol Pateman argues that the process of participation develops democratic capacities and cultures, something that should have a stabilizing impact and democratic institu-tions.7 What I think needs to be elaborated in the future are more convincing arguments for what a thick democratic civic culture could mean and why it should be existentially satisfying in a way that addresses the main contemporary critics of liberalism. Indeed, what is needed is a
5 Josiah Ober, Demopolis: Democracy before Liberalism in Theory and Practice (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2017), 90.
6 John Rawls, Political Liberalism, Expanded Edition (New York: Columbia University Press, 2005), 201-204.
7 Carole Pateman, Participation and Democratic Theory (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970), 43.
xxii	Introduction by Victor Bruzzone: Liberalism and Its Discontents
culture that would shift people away from the overly individualist tendencies of liberalism, empower them enough to not be tempted by reactionary movements, while still preserving basic legal equalities.
McManus’ idea of dignified self-authorship is a compelling step toward addressing the above, as well a foundation to ask related questions. For example, we might wonder how religious or other commitments can be said to be a form of self-authorship since it seems to depend on submitting to the authorship of others (God, the priesthood). However, the deliberate engagement with the discipline required to adopt religious values may indeed require quite a bit of self-authorship. Something similar might be said of anyone joining an organization that requires disciplined commitment. Thus, it would certainly be a mistake to think selfauthorship means purely maximizing activities that burden an individual the least. Still, the dilemma remains intact because arguably one of the important features of religious and other traditions is that they are something adopted by everyone. Any context that lets people choose how to live; the discontent of the conservative type may be unavoidable as a result of feeling like their strongly held beliefs are reduced to a mere choice. Whether building a civic culture on dignified self-authorship could be the path toward satisfying a larger portion of human types is something I invite the reader to consider. One possibility that is less often explored in normative political theory is the role myth and symbol play in a regime. Myths and symbols are not usually considered to be a necessary part of robust theories of justice. However, it might be a fruitful line of inquiry to consider the way in which a regime based on dignified selfauthorship might be built around myths and symbols. For example, symbols related to civic engagement that attempt to build thick cultural value patterns that celebrate (perhaps even ennoble) citizens that participate and contribute to the civic culture. By doing this, participation could reach the status that some pop-cultural phenomena have today. The ingredients for achieving this might very well be found in the pages of this book, if we can raise the value of dignified self-authorship to something more than just our rational interest, but something existential.
University of Toronto
Victor Bruzzone

Part I
Liberalism and Its Critics
 1 Liberal Rights and Their Critics
Theorizing on Liberalism and Liberal Rights
As I write this book a global pandemic is sweeping everything before it, aggravating an already tense geopolitical situation. The rise of postmodern conservatism from 2010 onwards convinced some authors that liberalism had “failed” and we were moving towards a new, post-liberal future. What they really meant in many cases was back to a nostalgized pre-liberal epoch, with various forms of soft-authoritarianism backing up a homogenizing unified morality or shared identity. The COVID 19 crisis has done a great deal to undermine these reactionary efforts, but the political left has thus far been unable to present any meaningful vision of an alternative to liberalism-really neoliberalism-despite the close call of democratic socialists like Bernie Sanders. The reason, I believe, is that for a very long time now academic and intellectual progressives have been entirely enamoured with critical theories who seek to undermine and expose the limitations of liberalism and which are inherently skeptical of any efforts to put forward systematic alternatives. A Critical Legal Examination of Liberalism and Liberal Rights, as the title suggests, is sympathetic to these efforts. This is because liberalism does indeed have                                      - 3 -M. McManus, A Critical Legal Examination of Liberalism and Liberal Rights, Palgrave Studies in Classical Liberalism, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61025'8_1
                                      - 4 -
limitations; some of the most obvious of which come to the fore when we look at rights discourse. Many liberals have doubled down on these limitations by aligning with the forces of reaction and inegalitarian hierarchies to insulate the power of capital from democratic pressures; that is more or less the story of neoliberal political economy in the late twentieth century when I grew up.
But limitations shouldn’t lead us to the over-zealous conclusion that liberalism has failed, or needs to be discarded wholesale. Instead my book argues that we need to rethink the potential of liberalism and liberal rights to be employed for more radical purposes. Showing this will require a lengthy dive into liberal history, which will be followed by an analysis of its limitations as highlighted by a variety of critics. After looking at this history, the book will move onto presenting a more progressive model of rights justified by an appeal to securing human dignity for all. This model of rights emphasizes the importance of both self and democratic authorship, at the level of the state and the workplace, and the need to ensure everyone is equally capable of living a rich life unless there a very compelling reasons justifying inequalities.
My position is that this argument is not some dramatic break with liberalism, but radical in the classical sense of the Latin radix, meaning root. The arguments for democracy and equality we see today have deep roots indeed in the liberal tradition, which at its best acknowledged the moral equality of all persons and demanded they be entitled to freedom from state coercion and even various forms of ideological heteronomy. Unfortunately it never went all the way in pursuing this insight, permitting tremendous inequities and unfreedom for a variety of reasons the book will unpack. Many of its limitations were enshrined and calcified in liberal law, which made it all the more difficult to push past their false necessity and establish the conditions for a more just society. As such the book concludes with a few sketches on how an alternative to liberal legalism can be conceived which would marry to the model of human dignity and rights argued for throughout the book. This will provide some resources on how to think of a genuinely post-liberal future that carries the best of liberalism forward towards a more dignified state of affairs.
                                      - 5 -The Global Origins of Rights Discourse
The conceit that rights discourse got its start purely in the Western world has increasingly been challenged both by critical legal scholars and a host of anthropologists, historians, and other commentators. The efforts of these figures have been directed towards showing that the idea or ideal of rights in fact developed in many different parts of the globe at various different times throughout history. Their revelations and arguments are not just intended to serve as a historical corrective to inaccurate and selfserving Occidental-centric narratives. Scholars like Amartya Sen and Jack Donnelly invoke the global origins of rights discourse to provide normative support for the idea of rights as a whole.1 By suggesting that rights emerged within many cultures, the hope is to legitimate them by appealing something like a global “overlapping consensus.” It is also to undermine the arguments of despotic critics eager to insist they aren’t beholden to human rights standards since rights are alien concepts wrongfully exported by force onto unwilling parts of the world. If rights genuinely emerged from a variety of backgrounds, that may give them a moral force which would be lacking were they to have been little more than the invention of seventeenth century liberals eager to protect their property while happily indulging in the slave trade.2
Jack Donnelly is perhaps the most prominent scholar associated with the argument that rights discourse has a universalistic basis. In his classic book Universal Human Rights in Theory and In Practice he points to many of the antecedents to modern human rights codes which emerged in a variety of different countries outside the Western states.3 Perhaps the
1 Jack Donelly. Universal Human Rights in Theory and Practice: Third Edition. (Ithaca, NY. Cornell University Press, 2013).
2 Of course there are substantial problems with arguing that a universalistic origin for human rights inherently legitimates them. A severe critic might even point out that such argumentation involves the genetic fallacy of applying positive association to rights discourse because they were originally conceived by a broad array of peoples. But I would argue such a severe criticism would miss the point in Sen and Donnelly’s arguments, which is that such broad support for rights at least bucks the argument that they are merely an imposition by hegemonic Western powers upon the developing world and at best might provide a basis of democratic legitimation for the project going forward. I will return to these points later in the book.
3 Jack Donnelly. Universal Human Rights in Theory and Practice: Third Edition. (Ithaca, NY. Cornell University Press, 2013).
                                      - 6 -
most prominent are the edicts of the Buddhist Emperor Ashoka, which laid out rights for prisoners and placed restrictions on severe punishments, encouraged religious tolerance, and even emphasized the importance of respect for animals. Sen makes similar points in his books Development as Freedom and The Idea of Justice, when he describes how the religious injunctions of Hinduism manifested many of the same moral principles as one finds in contemporary human rights codes.4 Religious scholars from the Vatican and the Islamic world have often pointed to antecedents to human rights codes from within their own faith traditions. The monotheistic faiths stressed the rights human beings enjoy as the favored creation of the transcendent God, an idea which was still present in the work of Locke through the American founding fathers. And indeed, this argument finds expression in many of the Islamic declarations on human rights which have emerged since the mid-twentieth century.
Professor Lo Chung-Shu claims that, though there is no strict translation of the term “rights” into Mandarin this does not mean the Chinese had no conception of human rights. Shu argues that the Confucian tradition stresses the right of people to revolt against rulers who do not look after their interests, while also stressing the adoption of a “sympathetic attitude” towards the rights of others.5 And Oritsegbubemi Oyowe stresses that, despite the protestations of relativist critics, one can draw on the formidable history of African philosophy to find a justification for rights. Saying that, there remain considerable difficulties in reconciling the collectivist orientation of much African thinking with the individualist emphasis of rights discourse.6
Taken together these examples do make a compelling case that even if what we (post) moderns might recognize as rights discourse in the technical, lawyerly sense isn’t an eternal and universal feature of human life, the idea of rights finds enough cross-cultural support to potentially be
4 Amartya Sen. The Idea of Justice. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009) and Amartya Sen. Development as Freedom. (New York, NY: Anchor Books, 1999).
5 Lo Chung-Shu. “A Confucian Approach to Human Rights.” UNESCO Courier, April 2018 https://en.unesco.org/courier/2018-4/confucian-approach-human-rights.
6 Oritsegbubemi Anthony Oyowe. “An African Conception of Human Rights?: Comments on the Challenges of Relativism.” Human Rights Review, Vol 15, 2014.
                                      - 7 -legitimated through an overlapping consensus. Interesting as such a possibility might be, it is ultimately not the purpose of this book to defend the historical universalism of rights discourse. This is in part because even if one could demonstrate that different cultural and religious traditions have or at least could agree on the existence of rights that does not resolve a key problem; the determination of which specific rights would be respected and protected.. Such questions, in the twenty-first century, are of course controversial. While governments as diverse as Saudi Arabia and Sweden profess to respect human rights, the form this respect takes is obviously very different. More important still even if one could identify certain rights as enjoying some sort of universal acknowledgment, that doesn’t in and of itself make them morally compelling. It could simply be the case that many people have been wrong in a variety of contexts.
Here I will make a crucial distinction between the potentially universal idea of human rights, and the universality of liberal rights more specifically. Until recently, the two have been conflated without significant analysis which in turn helped generate the critique that human rights concepts were little more than a Western effort to justify the imposition of Western norms and laws on other cultures. If the arguments of figures like Donnelly and Oyowe are true, and some concept of human rights is embedded in a variety of cultural and legal constructs, then the challenge isn’t so much with insisting that different cultures accept a system of universal rights, but rather that in recent history the West has insisted that other cultures accept liberal rights concepts even if liberalism was foreign to them This charge has some weight to it.7 Later, I will argue that neoliberalism effected just this kind of top-down enforcement of a limited set of liberal rights upon communities, which often led-intentionally or oth-erwise-t o corrosive and undemocratic results. But before engaging in such analysis I will discuss the origins of liberal conceptions of rights more generally, starting in the natural law tradition and moving forward through the European Enlightenment. This will help the reader to grasp the historical and ideological specificity of liberal rights discourse.
7 But as I shall show even it remains problematic, since while it is true that liberal rights were often imposed from above, that in and of itself is insufficient to deny their moral validity. Chapter 2 will take up this question in considerably more detail.
                                      - 8 -
Rights Discourse in Natural Law and the Renaissance
The discourse of liberal rights got its major start in the writings of natural law and Renaissance theorists. Ancient Greek and Roman authors no doubt played a substantial role in formulating many of the political and metaphysical concepts through which notions of civic participation, representation, and tyranny are formulated. These were undoubtedly crucial to the development of liberalism generally and liberal rights specifically. Indeed the impact of such thinkers can be seen in the voluminous citations of the Ancients and Scholastics by figures like Grotius, Locke, and of course the American founding fathers during the constitutional convention. However, as Strauss and other critics point out, it is crucial to not conflate the liberties of the Ancients and medieval scholars with those of the moderns.8 And indeed, modern natural law and rights theorists are often quite insistent on differentiating themselves from their auspicious predecessors. This indicates not only an intellectual shift crucial for the emergence of liberalism, but represents a more practical response to the limitations of classical and medieval discourses which stressed the importance of personal virtue and civic or religious engagement as a basis for political life. Liberal theorists were typically rather skeptical of this emphasis, as showcased by Madison’s tart remarks about Socratic goodness in Federalist 55:
The truth is, that in all cases a certain number at least seems to be necessary to secure the benefits of free consultation and discussion, and to guard against too easy a combination for improper purposes. As on the other hand, the number ought at most to be kept within a certain limit, in order to avoid the confusion and intemperance of a multitude. In all very numerous assemblies, of whatever characters composed, passion never fails to wrest the specter from reason. Had every Athenian citizen been a Socrates; every Athenian assembly would still have been a mob.9
8 Leo Strauss. Natural Right and History. (Chicago, IL. University of Chicago Press, 1953).
9 James Madison. “Federalist 55: The Total Number of the House of Representatives.” Yale Law School, 2008 https://avalon.law.yale.edu/18th_century/fed55.asp.
                                      - 9 -Early modern natural rights theorists imbibed much the same political realism, and formulated theoretical positions which were more appropriate to the transformative but also chaotic tempo of the period. Many seemed to agree with Machiavelli’s elegant satire of ancient reasoning; that suggesting politics is a place for the good is foolish, since virtuous people will be surrounded by so many who are not so. But they rarely descended into the harder edged formulations of realism found in the ever-disappointed Florentine, which can often appear paradoxical in their insistence that wickedness can be a kind of virtue. Instead modern natural rights theorists sought to combine an emphasis on liberty and free expression which were ascendant during the period with support for institutions which could facilitate peaceful cooperation and, eventually, a modicum of political participation for the elites.
There are many representative figures in this tradition. Pico Mirandola, writing in the Renaissance, is perhaps one of the more optimistic. In his famous “Oration on Human Dignity” he underplays the importance of the good life and emphasizes the glory of human beings and their possession of free will. Mirandola calls on human beings to operate in a quasidivine manner through creative activities which emulate and bring honor to God. He displays an incredible faith in the power of creativity and human intelligence to not only produce great works, but to also bring about peace both within the individual and externally.
In a striking passage, Mirandola analyzes how to overcome strife between the nations. Curiously his solution is not at all the exercise of political power or coercive violence. Instead he invokes the importance of moral philosophy to restrain the “unreasoning drives of the protean brute.” In this manner Mirandola is able to reconcile a commitment to freedom to be creative with the more practical concern to establish peace and order. It is in fact through enabling free inquiry that individuals can arrive at the importance of moral philosophy, which can help them overcome the “many forces” which strive within them and establish a pact between the needs of the flesh and those of the spirit. This pact, once confirmed, will enable more complete individuals to make peace with one another.
                                      - 10 -
Let us also inquire of the just Job, who made his covenant with the God of life even before he entered into life, what, above all else, the supreme God desires of those tens of thousands of beings which surround Him. He will answer, without a doubt: peace, just as it is written in the pages of Job: He establishes peace in the high reaches of heaven. And since the middle order interprets the admonitions of the higher to the lower orders, the words of Job the theologian may well be interpreted for us by Empedocles the philosopher. Empedocles teaches us that there is in our souls a dual nature; the one bears us upwards toward the heavenly regions; by the other we are dragged downward toward regions infernal, through friendship and discord, war and peace; so witness those verses in which he laments that, torn by strife and discord, like a madman, in flight from the gods, he is driven into the depths of the sea. For it is a patent thing, O Fathers, that many forces strive within us, in grave, intestine warfare, worse than the civil wars of states. Equally clear is it that, if we are to overcome this warfare, if we are to establish that peace which must establish us finally among the exalted of God, philosophy alone can compose and allay that strife. In the first place, if our man seeks only truce with his enemies, moral philosophy will restrain the unreasoning drives of the protean brute, the passionate violence and wrath of the lion within us. If, acting on wiser counsel, we should seek to secure an unbroken peace, moral philosophy will still be at hand to fulfill our desires abundantly; and having slain either beast, like sacrificed sows, it will establish an inviolable compact of peace between the flesh and the spirit.10
Of course Mirandola was writing at the beginning of the Renaissance, a time of considerable optimism and increasing openness. Had he lived through the doctrinal and political turmoil of the following centuries, he might have wound up with a less elated perspective. Martin Luther, writing in the first half of the 1500’s, was a crucial figure in exercising his freedom to demand dramatic changes which amplified personal liberties, while of course laying the seeds for intense conflicts which were to absorb the lives of many Europeans for a century and more. Luther’s relationship to secular authority is of course mixed and seemingly contentious; one of the reasons the critical theorist Erich Fromm characterized him as a
10 Giovanni Mirandola. “Oration on the Dignity of Man” trans. Available online. http://web. mnstate.edu/gracyk/courses/web%20publishing/pico_oration.htm.
                                      - 11 -precursor to the “authoritarian personality” in the book of the same name. And indeed Luther had little patience for the demands of peasants for greater redistribution of wealth and power. But he was insistent that secular authorities had the duty to respect the religious rights of their citizens. The princes had no right to constrain the faithful through force; it should rather leave them to their own affairs.
Furthermore, every man is responsible for his own faith, and he must see to it for himself that he believes rightly. As little as another can go to hell or heaven for me, so little can he believe or disbelieve for me; and as little as he can open or shut heaven or hell for me, so little can he drive me to faith or unbelief. Since, then, belief or unbelief is a matter of every one’s conscience, and since this is no lessening of the secular power, the latter should be content and attend to its own affairs and permit men to believe one thing or another, as they are able and willing, and constrain no one by force. For faith is a free work, to which no one can be forced. Nay, it is a divine work, done in the Spirit, certainly not a matter which outward authority should compel or create. Hence arises the well-known saying, found also in Augustine, “No one can or ought be constrained to believe.11
Of course very few of the European princes accepted Luther’s counsel, resulting in varied conflicts culminating in the Thirty Years War. At the same time there was a growing push to extend religious and creative liberty into the political sphere by granting more power to representative government. These practical developments bore on the work of Hugo Grotius, who with Hobbes is perhaps the most important proto-liberal thinker of the period. Grotius’ epic work On the Law of War and Peace, first published in 1625, is notable in several important respects. Firstly, it attempts to build a bridge between the teleological and religious outlooks of the Ancients and the rationalism of the moderns. Perhaps the most indicative example is Grotius’ insistence, after a long analysis of the relationship between God and morality, that even if God did not exist the same mores would none the less apply. Secondly, Grotius is often cited as one of the fathers of international law. This is not especially important for
11 Martin Luther. Selections From His Writings, ed. John Dillenberger. (New York, NY: Random House, 1962) at pg 385.
                                      - 12 -
our purposes, but it does demonstrate a growing awareness of the need to look beyond the personal behaviors of citizens and the constraints imposed by states on themselves for an answer to major political problems. This would be important for later cosmopolitan liberals from Kant through Donnelly and Sen. Thirdly and most crucially, Grotius’s efforts to square rights to liberty in support of order and-as the title of his major work suggests-peace remain important. Grotius, owing both to his vast learning and considerable personal experience, was wary of the overextension and malice of state power and the chaotic potential latent within personal liberties. In On the Law of War and Peace Grotius specifies that before the concept of personal property was introduced everyone had a natural right to use their full power against whatever stood in his way. However, with the advent of personal property, it became necessary that right be understood as obeying the dictates of reason. This inclined men to act in their interest yes, but also meant that their behavior needed to conform to the dictate of right reason. This included obedience to the laws of God, but also obedience to the laws instituted by human authorities for the protection of life and property.
Natural right is the dictate of right reason, shewing the moral turpitude, or moral necessity, of any act from its agreement or disagreement with a rational nature, and consequently that such an act is either forbidden or commanded by God, the author of nature. The actions, upon which such a dictate is given, are either binding or unlawful in themselves, and therefore necessarily understood to be commanded or forbidden by God. This mark distinguishes natural right, not only from human law, but from the law, which God himself has been pleased to reveal, called, by some, the voluntary divine right, which does not command or forbid things in themselves either binding or unlawful, but makes them unlawful by its prohibition, and binding by its command.12
With this transition in Grotius’ work we see an important shift away from the early optimism of Mirandola. For the Italian scion of the Renaissance, political authorities and elites had nothing to fear from the
12 Hugo Grotius. On the Laws of War and Peace, trans. A.C Campbell. (Kitchener, Ontario: Batoche Books, 2001) at pg 9.
                                      - 13 -freedom of their citizens. Liberty and creativity would lead individuals to moral philosophy, which would in turn guide their actions and bring about ongoing piece. This youthful optimism largely disappears in Grotius, though his proto-liberal spirit is never entirely dampened. For Grotius, our natural state of liberty is a good to be preserved, but it must be subordinated to the demands of “right reason” which calls for showing respect to venerable human authorities. The most important of these is respect for the law, particularly laws surrounding private property, without which there can ultimately be no peace, but only moral deformity and war. These points are not made as systematically as they would be in the work of the major liberal thinkers emerging a generation later. There is an important sense in which Grotius remains beholden to Scholastic expectations in philosophy and politics.13 But they are none the less presented insistently, possibly indicating Grotius’ sense of himself as an innovator. Grotius is unable to fully step out of the old pre-Westphalian world which was collapsing and into the new liberal capitalism of the future. This would not be a problem for Hobbes, who for all his legendary personal caution, made no bones about breaking firmly with Scholasticism and its Renaissance offshoots to put politics on a thoroughly modern footing.
The Emergence of Liberal Rights in Hobbes
For seeing life is but a motion of limbs, the beginning whereof is in some principal part within, why may we not say that all automata (engines that move themselves by springs and wheels as doth a watch) have an artificial life? For what is the heart, but a spring; and the nerves, but so many strings; and the joints, but so many wheels, giving motion to the whole body, such
13 Of particular note is Grotius’ manner of reasoning about first principles. Descartes, Hobbes, Locke and others were far more convinced of the need to establish liberalism and respect for liberty and property on quasi-rationalistic or scientific lines. While they certainly make voluminous references to earlier authors, the sense of novelty in their presentations is far more prominent, as is the ambition towards systematicity. Grotius occasionally writes in a similar manner, but his style and approach owes a great deal more to Scholasticism than the others. It is replete with appeals to Ancient and Christian wisdom, even while trying to make recognizably modern and liberal points. This unusual situatedness between past and future is what makes Grotius’ work both historically significant and interesting.
                                      - 14 -
as was intended by the Artificer? Art goes yet further, imitating that rational and most excellent work of Nature, man. For by art is created that great LEVIATHAN called a COMMONWEALTH, or STATE (in Latin, CIVITAS), which is but an artificial man, though of greater stature and strength than the natural, for whose protection and defence it was intended; and in which the sovereignty is an artificial soul, as giving life and motion to the whole body; the magistrates and other officers of judicature and execution, artificial joints; reward and punishment (by which fastened to the seat of the sovereignty, every joint and member is moved to perform his duty) are the nerves, that do the same in the body natural; the wealth and riches of all the particular members are the strength; salus populi (the people’s safety) its business; counsellors, by whom all things needful for it to know are suggested unto it, are the memory; equity and laws, an artificial reason and will; concord, health; sedition, sickness; and civil war, death.14
'ttomas Hobbes, Introduction to Leviathan
Hobbes, whose greatest work was published in the mid-1600’s, is, as Rawls claimed, the most influential English speaking political philoso-pher.15 Whether he deserves to be called the most influential political philosopher of modernity is more debatable. He would certainly be a strong contender, and it is likely Hobbes would be frustrated that the answer wasn’t obviously in his favor. Part of the problem is that in some respects Hobbes’ work also seems hampered by the same kind of limitations as Grotius’. He comes across as a man looking forward with his scientific worldview and materialist metaphysics, before looking firmly back when endorsing authoritarianism and an apparently limitless state sovereign. Hobbes takes no prisoners in his relentless assault on religious and scholastic idols; at times almost seeming to relish his characterization of them as little more than the vain creations of fanciful and idle linguists. Yet his political theory is cautious, dark, and even deferential at times. At least that is how the typical story goes.
Recent commentary on Hobbes by scholars like Richard Tuck and David Dyzenhaus have tended to emphasize the modern and even hyper
14 Thomas Hobbes. Leviathan. (London, UK: Penguin Books, 1982) at pg 81.
15 John Rawls. Lectures on the History of Political Philosophy. (Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2008) at pg 23.
                                      - 15 -modern features of his thinking; stressing how much Hobbes remains our contemporary (or even a man ahead of our time?). Tuck stresses that Hobbes’ subjectivist foundations for morality seem very close to a kind of relativism, which in turn explains his demand that power needs to establish order since philosophy is unable.16 Where Mirandola believed that political liberty could be granted because moral philosophy would restrain our violent impulses, Hobbes reached the conclusion that liberty was dangerous because moral philosophy could only ever lead to the conclusion that each person must pursue their own desire as rationally as possible. By contrast David Dyzenhaus stresses that we need to abandon our authoritarian “Hobbist” interpretations of the philosopher for a more Hobbesian take. Dyzenhaus stresses that Hobbes actually incorporated many of the standard liberal rights into his theorizing.17 The most important was of course a right to life, which the sovereign could never abnegate since the source of her legitimacy was an agreement with subjects to protect them. If the sovereign violated these rights then it lost its legitimacy and could be overthrown. Whatever the case there seems to be little doubt that Hobbes occupies an important, if sometime awkward, place in the liberal tradition. But I would argue that is in part because his theorizing is often far richer and starker than many of his descendants. Its radicalness lies less in its specific programme, than in the dramatically new way it reformulates how one should look at political problems.
The natural law tradition which Hobbes wanted to do away with was long characterized by an Aristotelian stress on the embeddedness of human beings in the world. Much as a good knife existed to cut, we existed to fulfill our fundamental telos. This could only be done in the state or civil society, which was the natural habitat of human beings much as pods were for whales and hives were for bees. A state would fall apart should the souls of its citizens become corrupted and decayed. Christian theorists like Augustine and Aquinas gave this narrative an important twist by stressing that human beings are in fact not naturally embedded in the world, but in fact torn between the worldly pull of the body and the divine demands of the soul. But they still stressed that the corruption
16 Richard Tuck. Hobbes: A Very Short Introduction. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002).
17 David Dyzenhaus. “Hobbes and the Legitimacy of Law.” Law and Philosophy 20 (2001) at pg 496.
                                      - 16 -
one sees in the world was a deviation from the intended order; in this case as prescribed by God in his heavens. Hobbes would have none of this. At the outset of Leviathan he castigates much of the conceptual architecture relied on by political philosophers for centuries as so much fluff and nonsense. He is convinced that human beings are simply animals in a material world. Indeed, the effort to situate us as some kind of higher being entitled to special reverence, or blessed with a unique destiny was little more than vainglory which would only lead individuals to conflict. Hobbes’ tart discussion of Aristotelian reasoning—“absurdly said”, “repugnant” and so on are just a few of the terms Hobbes reserves for the “master of those who know”—stems chiefly from this ambition to set classical thinking to the side. As he put it in Leviathan:
And I believe that scarce anything can be more absurdly said in natural philosophy than that which now is called Aristotle’s Metaphysics; nor more repugnant to government than much of that he hath said in his Politics, nor more ignorantly, than a great part of his Ethics.1
Hobbes wanted to place politics on a firm foundation in reason for the first time, and to accomplish this monumental task a great deal of “vain philosophy” needed to be chucked.19 But what then would replace it?
18 Thomas Hobbes. Leviathan. (London, UK: Penguin Books, 1982) at pg 687.
19 It is worth pausing for a moment here and thinking of the price for this Hobbesian innovation. Hobbes’ radical modernism has long been discussed by acute cultural theorists who point to him as the father of relativism and instrumental reason, with all the nihilistic connotations implied by this characterization. This also facilitates the reading of Hobbes as a proto liberal, as many critics of Hobbes emphasize his theoretical contributions to the emptiness of liberalism going forward. Perhaps the most recent and best critic in this vein is Patrick Deneen. In Why Liberalism Failed Deneen espouses that to some extent Hobbes enjoyed a premonition of the future which was absent in later, less honest liberal thinkers. In particular he argued for precisely what liberalism became. Its initial formulations about absolute freedom, and the normative emphasis placed on freedom and the pursuit of desire, ultimately gave way to calls for an absolutist state which would prudently manage our many difficulties. This was also De Tocquevilles anxiety about democracy at various points; the emptiness of democratic subjects, driven by crude pursuit of desire could lead to granting all power to a state which would manage life with dreary efficiency. It would undertake the eminently Hobbesian task of levelling vainglorious distinctions between desires to insist that in the end all pleasures and pursuits were equal to one another.
These, and others, are serious objections to the Hobbesian project and any similarly modernist effort. Hobbes to some extent appears largely indifferent to them, both because any effort to ground life on a different basis would be wrong and quite likely also dangerous. I will discuss these
                                      - 17 -Hobbes’ gutting any transcendent source of moral authority from his system blocks many potential options. His decision is to put desire at the forefront of his new science of politics, though this is desire understood in a distinctively modern way. Hobbes insists that we not think of desire as flowing from some teleological orientation towards preset goals which exist in accordance with our nature. Instead he comes very close to granting Bentham’s point that we are governed exclusively by two sovereigns alone: pleasure and pain. All our actions can be understood as driven by seeking out the former and trying to avoid the latter.
But whatsoever is the object of any man’s Appetite or Desire; that is it, which he for his part calleth Good: And the object of his Hate, and Aversion, evill; And of his contempt, Vile, and Inconsiderable. For these words of Good, evill, and Contemptible, are ever used with relation to the person that useth them: There being nothing simply and absolutely so; nor any common Rule of Good and evill, to be taken from the nature of the objects themselves; but from the Person of the man (where there is no Common-wealth;) or, (in a Common-wealth) from the person that repre-senteth it, 20
This has the naturalistic virtue of denying any transcendent source of value, and thereby grounding politics and morals in empirical materialism. But it comes at a serious price Hobbes seemed well aware of. Specifically it raises the specter of relativism as a serious problem in social life, as Tuck puts it in his excellent introduction to Hobbes.21 If each of us is naturalistically driven by our desire to pursue pleasures, understood in our own way and without submitting to any transcendent arbiter of right and wrong or higher and lower ambitions, then we have no reasonable basis to refrain from doing whatever we wish even if that is harmful to another. Reason can only tell us how to pursue those desires most
problems at greater length in the last Chapter of the book. This is in part because genealogically my own interpretation of rights is thoroughly modernist, emphasizing freedom and self-creation as it does. It is therefore open to many of the same objections. I will try to answer some of these in the book through an argument on why my approach to dignity and rights entails not just a theory of the “right” as it is sometimes called, but also an account of the good life.
20 Thomas Hobbes. Leviathan. (London, UK: Penguin Books, 1982) at pg 120.
21 Richard Tuck. Hobbes: A Very Short Introduction. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2002).
                                      - 18 -
effectively; it can never insist, as Aristotle wished, that we should refrain from certain pursuits since they are immoral, or debased, or ungodly. The end result of this is well known. Rational calculators living in the state of nature engage in the “warre of all against all.” In this context life is little more than suffering, with each person enjoying a general right to all things but no one enjoying a protected or exclusive right to anything, even their own life. In such a context the life of man can only ever by “solitary, poore, nasty, brutish, and short.” These five emphatic adjectives in a single sentence are invoked by Hobbes to show us the deadly situation his own naturalistic thinking on politics and morality has driven him to.
Fortunately Hobbes finds the key out of Tuckian relativism and the associated violence of the state of nature by appealing to a master desire which subordinates all others. This is of course the desire to live a long life, or at least to the natural extent of our days. The desire for such an expansive existence is of course not higher in some philosophical sense, but it does approximate a higher qualitative pitch in its intensity, duration, and of course usefulness for Hobbes’ theory. Because we wish above all else to live out the extent of our natural days, Hobbes can make the prudentialist argument that it is in each person’s self-interest properly understood to give up their general right to all things for the exclusive right to some; most particularly protection for one’s life, though at points Hobbes also suggests in a Lockean vein that property would also require protection. Interestingly enough, Hobbes gives these prudentialist arguments an antiquarian twist by characterizing them as natural laws which direct individuals to seek peace for their own good. Here I will quote Hobbes at some length, given the richness of the passage:
And because the condition of man (as hath been declared in the precedent chapter) is a condition of warre of every one against every one, in which case everyone is governed by his own reason, and there is nothing he can make use of that may not be a help unto him in preserving his life against his enemies; it followeth that in such a condition every man has a right to every thing, even to one another’s body. And therefore, as long as this natural right of every man to every thing endureth, there can be no security to any man, how strong or wise soever he be, of living out the time which
                                      - 19 -nature ordinarily alloweth men to live. And consequently it is a precept, or general rule of reason: that every man ought to endeavour peace, as far as he has hope of obtaining it; and when he cannot obtain it, that he may seek and use all helps and advantages of war. The first branch of which rule containeth the first and fundamental law of nature, which is: to seek peace and follow it. The second, the sum of the right of nature, which is: by all means we can to defend ourselves. From this fundamental law of nature, by which men are commanded to endeavour peace, is derived this second law: that a man be willing, when others are so too, as far forth as for peace and defence of himself he shall think it necessary, to lay down this right to all things; and be contented with so much liberty against other men as he would allow other men against himself.22
At first this appeal to natural law might seem rather anachronistic. After all, doesn’t Hobbes break decisively with this tradition to argue that we must contract away all our general rights to unlimited freedom and grant them to an all-powerful sovereign with the power to establish lasting peace? Hobbes does indeed write this way quite often throughout the Leviathan. In his famous definition of the sovereign he describes it in nearly divine terms as the “great Leviathan, or rather, to speak more reverently, of that mortal god to which we owe, under the immortal God, our peace and defense.” In Chapter 18 he discusses no less than 12 rights which are granted to the sovereign in perpetuity. To describe just a few, Hobbes insists that the “strength and means” of all are to be ceded to the sovereign to use as he sees fit to establish peace and defense throughput the realm. He also claims that if a majority of individuals consent to be governed by the sovereign “he that dissented must now consent with the rest.” On the question of whether citizens have a right to complain, Hobbes insists that the sovereign can do “no injury” to his subjects nor can they accuse him of any injustice. Indeed any harm inflicted on a citizen by the sovereign ultimately is to be blamed on the former rather than the latter. All the rules of society, including those on “good, evil, lawful, and unlawful” actions are to be determined by the sovereign.23
22 Thomas Hobbes. Leviathan. (London, UK: Penguin Books, 1982) at pgs 189—190.
23 Thomas Hobbes. Leviathan. (London, UK: Penguin Books, 1982) at Chapter Eighteen.
                                      - 20 -
So why then is Hobbes a founding figure for liberalism, and even the doctrine of liberal rights? The reasons are subtle, but deep. Firstly, Hobbes insists that the sovereign is purely artificial rather than natural, and its authority is established through covenant. In the latter sections of Leviathan efforts to use theology and teleological abstractions to justify power are submitted to relentless satire which would make Voltaire proud. This takes on a more practical implication in Behemoth, Hobbes account of the English Civil War, where he places a lot of the blame for the violent conflict at the feet of theological sophists. Secondly, as David Dyzenhaus points out, this lack of authority being granted from on high means that, contra the Hobbist account, Hobbesian citizens retain certain fundamental rights against their ruler carried over from the state of initial equality in the state of nature.24 The most obvious is the right to life, which the sovereign cannot infringe without violating his end of the original bargain. Another important right is to effective government which can provide sufficient protection and order, as per the conditions of the original mutual covenant to obey common authority. Where the sovereign can no longer defend its subjects from fear of a violent death, it is left to them to look after their own interests as in the state of nature.25 More theoretically, perhaps also more consequentially, Hobbes guts many of the moralistic arguments for imposing laws regulating behavior based on religious outlooks. While his concern for authority backed by fear have inspired some to paint Hobbes as a conservative, his position rests upon the decidedly hyper-modern insistence that morality is largely rela-tivistic and predicated on the pursuit of subjective desire. In the state of nature each of us believes what we believe because we want what we want, and there is no sophistical way of arguing past potential impasses. This is why the sovereign must ultimately have the decisionist power to settle moralistic disputes through the commands of positive law; not because it
24 David Dyzenhaus. “Hobbes and the Legitimacy of Law.” Law and Philosophy 20 (2001).
25 This point is of course quite emancipatory, as it were even paradoxical, since it is not obvious what constitutes a sufficiently robust protection and harmonious order to warrant fidelity. Such tensions are emblematic of Hobbes, and by extension, the liberal tradition more generally.
                                      - 21 -has reached the right conclusion, but because it has the power to back up that decision with the threat of violence towards those who dispute it.26
It is hard to overstate the novelty of this last argument, and how contemporary and radical it still sounds. Hobbes acknowledges that there is nothing good and evil, but thinking makes it so. The problem is that each person has different thoughts on the matter. Morality is irreducibly relative and tied to subjective self-interest. But the dangers this poses, embodied in the warre of all against all, necessitate the generation of political authority to use violence and fear to settle such disputes. Not because might is right, but because only violence and fear are sufficient to incline individuals against pursuing their privately legitimate self-interest to mutual ruin. When the sovereign loses the capacity to impose such violence and fear across the body politic, then its right to govern is also withdrawn.27 No one retains an indefinite right to govern where they cease to do so effectively, in no small part because all people are born equal in their moral qualities. That many dimensions of this position operate in tensions with another—a call for a politics of absolutism backed by violence and fear built upon a relativistic egalitarianism—is less a knock against Hobbes and more a testament to his honesty and ability to foresee the many tensions of modernity with transparent clarity. These tensions would continue to haunt his liberal progeny, as we shall see, in particular in the desire to maintain hierarchies of property rights and political power in the face of an increasingly egalitarian ethos.
26 In his great but troubling book The Leviathan in the State Theory of Thomas Hobbes Carl Schmitt argues that the decisionist quality of Hobbes’ work reflects the modernist anxiety about moral homogeneity across the body (politic?). Unless sovereign power is used to enforce such homogeneity there can only ever be conflict between contrasting theological visions, secularized or otherwise. Of course as the chief jurist of fascism, Schmitt is keen to agree with Hobbes about the need for power to enforce such homogeneity. He only chastises Hobbes for not going far enough, and allowing citizens a certain degree of private space to hold different religious beliefs.
27 As Ian Ward points out, this argument was in some respects important in legitimating Oliver Cromwell’s republican government in giving leeway to Royalists concerned about transferring their loyalty to the new regime.
                                      - 22 -
Classical Liberal Rights Through Locke to Madison
Locke is perhaps the predominant figure in defending property rights and maintaining hierarchies of political power, though in far less honest a manner than Hobbes. Locke was an extraordinarily intelligent man who saw little contradiction in developing a revolutionary account of political legitimacy while simultaneously profiting from the slave trade, agitating for draconian laws about child labor, and disdaining the “natural rights” of Aboriginal peoples to land they had held for centuries.28 He was a famous snob who none the less insisted on the need to tolerate alternative points of view, setting a precedent for elitist multiculturalists to come. And of course Locke’s most important practical contribution, which is doubtless his theoretical influence on the American Revolution, is lauded and condemned for many of these same virtues and defects; apparently as transparent to our post-modern eyes as they were invisibly passed over in silence by seventeenth and eighteenth century liberals.
Locke was well positioned to inherit such contradictory impulses, living as he did at a historical crossroads. His father was a Puritan lawyer of modest means and Locke himself was born in 1632 into aggressively middle-class circumstances in Wrington near Somerset. He witnessed the English Civil War rage through his teenage years, after which there were decades of uncertainty as power passed from Parliament, to Cromwell’s protectorate, to the restoration of Charles II, and finally the Glorious Revolution and the installation of William of Orange and Mary as the new constitutional monarchs. At the same time continental Europe was dominated by the absolutism of Louis XIV, the Sun King who famously proclaimed “l’etat c’est moi” and the religious conflicts of the 30 Years War and minor successor conflicts. Perhaps by disposition or perhaps due to the broader culture, Locke imbibed many of the moral radical streams of thought being promoted at the time amongst elites. He won a place at
28 This was well explored by Connor O’Callaghan in his work on racist thinking in the political canon. See his article “Concerning a Critical Legal Pedagogy.” http://criticallegalthinking. com/2015/12/07/concerning-a-critical-legal-pedagogy-exposing-race-thinking-in-political-canon/.
                                      - 23 -Oxford University and famously rejected many of the Scholastic relics at the school, demonstrating a deeper interest in modern developments in the sciences and thinking. Locke remained there for a time until Lord Ashley, one of the wealthiest men in England, invited him to become his personal physician. Locke accepted, a move which saw him enter the epicenter of British politics. Lord Ashley-later Lord Shaftesbury-secured Locke a number of important government positions, including one helping to draft the constitution of the Carolinas. Locke was able to participate in many of the sexiest philosophical debates of the age, and during this period wrote many of the works that made his name, including the Essay Concerning Human Understanding and the Two Treatises on Government. After Shaftesbury’s death Locke was forced to flee to the Netherlands where he wrote the Letter Concerning Toleration. After the Glorious Revolution Locke returned to England, where he died in 1695, having witnessed some of the most tumultuous years in his country’s history.
One of the most integral elements of Locke’s politics flows organically from his theory of the self, which like Hobbes’ materialism and empiricism, also reacted strongly against the essentialist Aristotelianism of the earlier age. In the Western tradition, from Plato onwards, there was an insistence that the source of the self must ultimately lie in some eternal essence which transcended the material to and fro of the world of shadows. The soul was the most common elucidation of this essence a concept which has influence thousands of monotheistic commentators over mil-lennia.29 By contrast Locke made the highly influential argument30 that
29 I by no means intend this as a presumptive claim that disputes over the existence of the soul or some other non-material source of the self are settled. While it may be the case that classically Platonic or Thomistic arguments are no longer taken as seriously by professional philosophers, this does not mean that the argument for materialism and empiricism is beyond question-or even necessarily ascendant. Figures like Saul Kripke, David Chalmers, and the disgraced John Searle have raised serious and even fatal objections to at least a simple materialism which sees the self as essentially the product of neural processes, and not flowing from some ontologically distinct properties unique to what we call consciousness. While fascinating, I will not arbitrate these disputes at length here. See Saul Kripke. Naming and Necessity. (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell, 1991) and David Chalmers. The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1997).
30 My interpretation of Locke’s theory of the self is highly guided by Derek Parfit’s seminal early critique in his paper on different theories of selfhood. See Derek Parfit. “Personal Identity.” Philosophical Review, Vol 80, 1971.
                                      - 24 -
the self was not some essential and eternal entity which existed within but also beyond our experiences of time. Locke is even critical of the more modern, but still residually Platonic, claim that the self might pre-exist experience as a collection of innate ideas located within consciousness. For Locke, the source of the self is first and foremost our memories established through time. The fact that I can draw a temporal continuity in the experiences of who I was at 8 and who I am now as I write a paragraph on Locke is what showcases that both the child and the man are one and the same. The same interest in continuity within experiential time takes on a more general application in Locke’s political philosophy, which is centered first and foremost on a critique of efforts to ground sovereign authority in transcendent sources. This is in part because sovereign authority comes to exist primarily to protect contingent but absolute “natural rights” to private property which preexisted politics in the state of nature.31
Locke makes the argument, following Hobbes, that it is inane to presume that anyone is granted an eternal right to rule outside of God. Reacting against the arguments of monarchists such as Robert Filmer that some men are born better than others and are thus entitled to rule, Locke maintains that in the state of nature there are no naturally superior or inferior people. However that does not suggest that they remain equal. While God may have given the earth to all individuals to hold in common, human beings redefine the parameters of that relationship through the application of their labor in the real world. Our initial property being our body32 it follows that anything which is produced by the labor of our body- particularly agrarian produce-is also ours. Why this is so is left ambiguous, as is the connection of this to Locke’s memory-oriented theory of the self. None the less we retain natural rights which cannot be constrained by any sovereign authority without our consent. With the introduction of money and its regulation by law, our natural rights to
31 Locke’s philosophy of the self has a deeper connection to his moral thinking than expected; it is not just that I wish to fulfill my desires but that I have a particular kind of experience to define my selfhood in a particular way which becomes important.
32 Hence Macpherson’s famous characterization of Lockean theory as a kind of possessive individualism.
                                      - 25 -entitlements are expanded to very different kinds of products and entities. This generates considerable and vastly different proportions of wealth allocated to various individuals.
This partage of things in an inequality of private possessions, men have made practicable out of the bounds of society, and without compact, only by putting a value on gold and silver, and tacitly agreeing to the use of money: for in governments, the laws regulate the rights of property, and the possession of land is determined by positive constitutions.33
'tte consequences of generalizing this position were quite extensive, and conducive to many of the tensions which would later emerge in the practice of liberalism. In theory all individuals possess the same intrinsic natural rights in a state of initial equality. But this does not mean that they are entitled to enjoy the same benefits from such natural rights, or that the theoretical equality in the state of nature is isomorphic with political or material equality in civil society. 'tte elliptical quality of this reasoning is mediated through an appeal to a labor theory of value, which occupies an influential but strange place within Locke’s system. The inference-and that is all it is-seems to be that the actual discrepancies existing in civil society as it exists can be explained away by appealing to the different efforts of its members. But Locke makes no substantial efforts to justify this inference beyond appeals to the class prejudices of his readers.34
33 John Locke. Second Treatise on Government. (Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing, 1980) at pg 29.
34 This would of course become a substantial point of analysis for Marxist critics down to the present day. Though Marx’s interpretation of liberal labour theories of value is more influenced by engaging with the work of David Ricardo, many of his objections still apply. Marx is of course often misinterpreted as arguing for a labour theory of value, when in fact his account of socially necessary labour time is considerably more complex and socially determined than Lockean or Ricardian accounts. But his central point, that if the logic of bourgeois political economy were taken seriously it would create a substantial problem, is powerful. If you concede that labour creates value and an entitlement to possess that value, serious questions are raised about why capital receives the lion’s share while workers who actually do most of the work get so much less. This leads quite organically to the conclusion that some form of exploitation and even theft is taking place. The only plausible objection for proponents of the labor theory of value is to argue that it is actually capital which does most of the work and is therefore entitled to most of the value produced. This debate is carried on in the present day in the work of Robert Nozick and G.A Cohen, with both drawing on various
                                      - 26 -
Further problems emerge in the account of political legitimacy which appears in Locke. Since we have a natural right to liberty, any constraints on it must result from our consent. But there remain considerable disputes amongst Locke scholars on how this consent is to be ascertained, whether it applies indefinitely, and how and whether future generations are to be bound by the decisions of a long dead minority. One of the most common solutions offered is that Locke relies on a theory of tacit consent; by living within the state and obeying its laws once tacitly consents to the legitimacy of both the government and the legal order. This is not a particularly good argument of course, despite a pedigreed heritage that goes back to Socrates in the Crito. It is quite possible that, qua H.L.A Hart, I may feel obliged to obey the laws passed by state authorities because of the threats they pose to my person or property. But this does not mean that under more hospitable circumstances I would not reject any one of those laws or even the legal order as a whole.35 More convincing are proto-utilitarian or even proto-Rousseauean interpretations which take Locke as arguing that so long as the state operates in the best interests of its citizens they can be said to have consented to it. Finally, one could take the institutional route and claim that consent is achieved through the participation of citizens in the process of representative government.
Each of these is a valid way to attempt to generate a consent-based account of political legitimacy, but all are undermined by Locke’s willingness to argue that only male property owners should have a say in affairs of state. It is very difficult to see how such a blatantly class-based argument can be married to any of the aforementioned interpretations of Lockean consent. If theories of tacit consent are weak in the way Hart describes when discussing being obliged to obey, they become hugely implausible when someone tries to argue that we tacitly legitimize an unequal order predicated on force simply by not resisting it. The
labor theories of entitlement to argue for libertarianism and socialism respectively. My personal belief is that there is little use to such arguments anymore. Indeed even Hayek largely acknowledged this point when he encouraged defenders of capitalism to cease relying on meritocratic and labor based arguments.
35 H.L.A Hart. 7The Concept of Law: Second Edition. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1997)
at pgs 82—83.
                                      - 27 -utilitarian or Rousseauean interpretation doesn’t fly since some people’s interests are blatantly given greater weight than others. And of course the institutional fix doesn’t really work either, since it is difficult to claim the propertyless majority are represented when they were given no say in who represents them or what they vote for.36 So ultimately Locke’s theory, for all its influence, is left in a strange place in trying to mediate the egalitarian and even democratic dimensions of its theoretical claims with the more concrete need to protect privileges and grant special entitlements to those deemed worthy of them. These problems were of course no barrier to his theory’s eventual widespread adoption; indeed the ways Lockeanism complemented the ambitions of the wealthy to upend the traditional nobility while putting the brakes on calls for full material equality were probably intrinsic to its appeal to many early liberals in the middle classes or “third estate.”
And appeal it did to the right people, particularly the American revolutionaries. Deeply, but as we shall see by no means exclusively, inspired by Lockean liberalism, the so called “founding Fathers” of the republic were similarly pulled in many different directions by their moral and practical concerns. On the one hand, many of them genuinely seemed to believe in liberal principles like “all men are created equal” in the sight of God. Despite some early calls by some more conservative elements of American society for a constitutional monarchy, the revolutionaries were often quite committed to setting up at least a moderately representative government. But they were also deeply concerned about the potential consequences of going too far. Some of these concerns were grounded in an erudite and conscientious look at the failings of earlier democracies and republics. No one can fault Madison or Hamilton for looking at the
36 These problems would remain challenging for American constitutional theorists inspired by Locke from the very beginning, particularly given the overt desire to maintain not just class- but raced-based privileges. One solution was the so called “virtual theory” which held that male property owners stood in and spoke for the interests of everyone else. This was influential enough that members of the Federalist society still articulated versions of the virtual theory as late as the 1980s. Of course, it all falls apart as both theoretically implausible and historically insulting to those deliberately precluded from participation. Claiming that x individual granted her consent to a government or law because individual y presumes the authority to speak for her and happens to support it is a special kind of self-serving argument. And historically it was very much self-serving, enabling propertied American men to enjoy immense privileges over women, blacks, and other minorities.
                                      - 28 -
history of Athens or Rome and having some reservations. Other concerns were more obviously self-serving, sometimes monstrously so when it came to the participation of women or freeing the slaves. The tiresome hagiography which still surrounds these figures belies the centuries of conflict that would arise as a result of arrogant exceptionalism. This is not particularly of note here. What was interesting in their arguments when looking at the history of liberalism was the approach they took to power in liberal societies.
Madison is an exemplar here in the myriad ways he endeavors to secure a Goldilocks type balance between various competing principles. Having rejected the idea of a constitutional monarchy, Madison is left in the dangerous position of having to support some form of classically democratic or republican rule. But, as per the famous observation about the impossibility of participatory rule even in a city peopled by Socrates clones, this was emphatically not to be a direct democracy. This stems in part from Madison’s abiding fear of majoritarianism, and the potential for a given faction to seize power in the state and operationalize it for an exclusive set of interests. This fear is expressed by Madison in Federalist 10 when discussing the rights of majorities and minorities. Interestingly, while this essay is now frequently invoked to uphold a pluralistic conception of American government, Madison was often far more concerned with the minority rights of the propertied than conventionally marginalized groups. He opines that the “most common and durable source of factions” has always been the unequal distribution of property, and expresses anxiety over a democratic majority using its powers to try and secure a different distributive arrangement.37
Those who hold and those who are without property have ever formed distinct interests in society. Those who are creditors, and those who are debtors, fall under a like discrimination. A landed interest, a manufacturing interest, a mercantile interest, a moneyed interest, with many lesser interests, grow up of necessity in civilized nations, and divide them into different classes, actuated by different sentiments and views. The regulation of these various and interfering interests forms the principal task of modern
37 Alexander Hamilton and James Madison and John Jay. The Federalist Papers, ed. Charles R. Kesler. (New York, NY: Signet Classics, 2003).
                                      - 29 -legislation, and involves the spirit of party and faction in the necessary and
ordinary operations of the government.38
Very quickly Madison goes on to claim that this argument is a decisive one in favor of republican rather than direct democratic rule. In addition to being subject to disorder and endless contention, direct democracy runs the risk of generating an escalating sentiment that granting equal political rights to all must inevitably lead to establishing them in equal conditions. Madison goes on to argue that this is one of the appeals of a republic over a democracy. A republic grants most power to the few rather than the mass of people. An added benefit is such a government can more easily control a wider territory than has traditionally been possible in democracies. Indeed, sheer geographic expanse can itself become an advantage, since any leader who wishes to pursue a “wicked” project such as the abolition of debts or equality of property will be unable to gain sufficient traction to enact their “improper” egalitarian project.
One of the most interesting elements of this analysis, which supports the conservative reading of Madisonian principles understood by many on the American right, is how its effort to balance various competing principles to ensure the preservation of the propertied is justified experientially and not theoretically. Madison condemns “... theoretic politicians, who have patronized this species of government, have erroneously supposed that by reducing mankind to a perfect equality in their political rights, they would, at the same time, be perfectly equalized and assimilated in their possessions, their opinions, and their passions.”39 Little effort is made to actually argue against this hypothetical “theoretic politician” who supposes that if individuals enjoy equal political rights perhaps they should be equal in other, more concrete senses. Madison’s considered position comes to look quite different than Locke’s, who was keen to appeal to labor as a metaphysical source of entitlement to property in the
38 James Madison. “Federalist Number 10: The Union as a Safeguard Against Domestic Faction and Insurrection.” Bill of Rights Institute, 2020 https://billofrightsinstitute.org/founding-documents/ primary-source-documents/the-federalist-papers/federalist-papers-no-10/.
39 James Madison. “Federalist Number 10: The Union as a Safeguard Against Domestic Faction and Insurrection.” Bill of Rights Institute, 2020 https://billofrightsinstitute.org/founding-documents/ primary-source-documents/the-federalist-papers/federalist-papers-no-10/.
                                      - 30 -
state of nature which carried onwards as non-fungible natural rights. Madison is similarly concerned to provide an empirical justification for property rights and defend them in a republican system. But his is not a philosophical empiricism qua Locke, but something closer to what Yoram Hazony would call “historical empiricism”40; based on traditions and the historical experience of a people given over a long period of time. This interpretation is backed up by Madison’s appeals to principles such as “wisdom,” “human nature,” balanced “happy combination,” expediency and worldly experience against “theoretic” ambitions.41 This historical empiricism leads to a skepticism about the virtues of government power being too extensive, and leads to the famous effort to divide powers into different branches. Madison is particularly concerned to limit legislative power, while acknowledging that it should predominate in a republic.
A dependence on the people is, no doubt, the primary control on the government; but experience has taught mankind the necessity of auxiliary precautions. This policy of supplying, by opposite and rival interests, the defect of better motives, might be traced through the whole system of human affairs, private as well as public. We see it particularly displayed in all the subordinate distributions of power, where the constant aim is to divide and arrange the several offices in such a manner as that each may be a check on the other that the private interest of every individual may be a sentinel over the public rights. These inventions of prudence cannot be less requisite in the distribution of the supreme powers of the State. But it is not possible to give to each department an equal power of self-defense. In republican government, the legislative authority necessarily predominates. The remedy for this inconveniency is to divide the legislature into different branches; and to render them, by different modes of election and different principles of action, as little connected with each other as the nature of
40 See Yoram Hazony. “Conservative Democracy.” First Things, January 2019. https://www.firstth-ings.com/article/2019/01/conservative-democracy.
41 Though he is happy to invoke universalistic ideas about natural rights when it suits his purpose. An obvious example would be in Federalist 51, when he returns to the topic of minorities and majorities. “It is of great importance in a republic not only to guard the society against the oppression of its rulers, but to guard one part of the society against the injustice of the other part. Different interests necessarily exist in different classes of citizens. If a majority be united by a common interest, the rights of the minority will be insecure.”
                                      - 31 -their common functions and their common dependence on the society
will admit.42
This skepticism of the legislative branch is not to be found in Locke, who is all too eager to locate political authority and power in the hands of representative government. By contrast Madison wants to elevate the legislature while simultaneously cutting it off at the feet. 'ttis is driven by his historical empiricism, and a willingness to follow principle forward only in so far as is expedient while denying its further extension if necessary. To cheerleaders of Madisonian approaches to rights and government, this demonstrates his enduring wisdom in ensuring that every faction and interest gets a small say but none is capable of dominating the other. To some this approximates the ideal of a neutral state. But this is not entirely true, since in his wisdom, Madison was keen to insist that democracy must be limited to prevent the unpropertied from engaging in “wicked” forms of redistribution. The Madisonian state divides interests up, but one of the chief motivations is to ensure that the propertyless will never be able to unite in an effective manner against the propertied. And even if they do manage to gain significant popular support, the limitations imposed on legislative power will ensure there is little they can do to effect “improper” mischief. That this seems inconsistent with an authentically equal distribution of political rights in the state seems to have crossed Madison’s mind. But he immediately dismisses such concerns as purely theoretical, and of no enduring interest to the practically minded politician.
Of course, such concerns are not purely theoretical, but come to have a dramatic political impact once people take them seriously. And indeed, the greatest liberal theorist would himself spend quite some time thinking through these questions and coming to very different and less selfserving conclusions than either Locke or his historical empiricist American progeny.
42 James Madison. “The Structure of Government Must Furnish the Proper Checks and Balances Between the Different Departments.” Bill of Rights Institute, 2020. https://billofrightsinstitute.org/ founding-documents/primary-source-documents/the-federalist-papers/federalist-papers-no-51/.
                                      - 32 -
The Kantian Innovation
For Kant, man is a rational being, and since reason implies universality and community, at least in part a ‘social’ being. He is not an autonomous monad who is only part of the community through his relations with other monads. On the contrary, man is in his very existence part of a greater whole, of a community, and therefore, of a universe. Both this community and this universe, however, are imperfect, for the actions of man are still dominated by powerful instincts and selfish interests which set him against his fellows and tend towards the disintegration of the community and the universe. Man is the ‘unsocial-sociable’ being. The selfish and anti-social actions and relations of the individual indicate his dependence upon his biological nature and upon the external world and constitute his heteron-omy; his tendency to strive towards a higher, perfect, community constitute his spiritual and rational nature, his freedom, his autonomy.43
Kant is the greatest liberal thinker because he was the first to think through liberalism’s many dimensions systematically and clearly. While it is going too far to agree with Schneewind that Kantianism was the culmination of “the invention of autonomy” Kant does go far deeper into interrogating and making central the problem of freedom than any of his predecessors.44 He places it on a philosophical foundation which was firm enough to warrant serious adherents to this day, the voluminous criticism notwithstanding. Though there is no space to interrogate the many dimensions of Kantian thinking here, I will briefly gesture to his critique of traditionalist metaphysics as a backdrop to Kant’s thinking about morality and ultimately about liberal politics.
In The Critique of Pure Reason, first published in 1781, Kant effectively completes many of the modernist arguments against scholastic and classical metaphysics levelled by philosophers such as Hobbes and Locke. He goes further than either of these two empiricists by insisting that it is not enough to show that an empirical and materialist approach to reality precludes many of the grandiose claims found in the earlier philosophies.
43 Lucien Goldmann. Immanuel Kant. (London, UK: Verso Books, 2011) at pg 223.
44 J.B. Schneedwind. The Invention of Autonomy: A History of Modern Moral Philosophy. (Cambridge, UK. Cambridge University Press, 1998).
                                      - 33 -One needs to demonstrate the conditions under which empirical phenomena appear to us as material reality. This leads to Kant’s famous conclusions about the role that the human mind plays in architectonically framing experience. It also generates a strong case for the universality of experiential objectivity, since Kant can then make the argument that the world appears the same way to all since the transcendental structure of the human mind is generically the same across cultures and history.45 This manifests the shared world we inhabit, as well as many of our collaborative achievements in the arts and sciences. But it also means that our pure reason is fundamentally limited in its capacity to understand reality in itself. This includes acquiring answers to the big questions about the beginning of the universe within time, the existence of God and so on. The consequence of this is that we need to seek solutions in our practical, or moral, reasoning and within aesthetics.
As Derek Parfit46 observed, in the space of 50 or so scant pages in the Groundwork to the Metaphysics of Morals Kant developed an immense number of novel moral ideas, many of which continue to provoke angry debates amongst graduate students to this day. This underplays the fact that such theoretical novelty brings with it a considerable number of unique difficulties. Despite Kant’s aspirations to present his moral theory systematically, down to the insistence that the different formulations of the categorical imperative largely express the same principle, most com-mentators47 have agreed that there are considerable tensions within his
45 Contemporary thinkers influenced by Kant have made similar arguments in a number of different fields. A notable example is Noam Chomsky, who has often associated his theory of a linguistic organ common to all human beings to Kantian thinking. This is part of the reason human languages share a common deep structure which enables them-with some difficulty-to be translated into one another. By contrast Chomsky observes that an alien language could very well be irrevocably opaque to us. This goes beyond the Wittgensteinian injunction that we cannot know a lion’s language because we do not know his world since the problem is not just experiential but relates back to the way the linguistic organ generates grammars comprehensible to human beings. See Noam Chomsky. On Language: Chomsky's Classic Works Language and Responsibility and Reflections on Language in One Volume. (New York, NY: New Press, 1998).
46 Derek Parfit. On What Matters: Volume One. (Oxford, United Kingdom. Oxford University Press, 2013).
47 This began very early, with Hegel praising Kant’s emphasis on freedom but claiming his interpretation of its association with duty was fundamentally empty. See Georg WF. Hegel 7The Philosophy of Right, trans. S.W Dyde. (Mineola, NY: Dover Press, 2005).
                                      - 34 -
work.48 Some, like Parfit and Scanlon,49 have primarily been impressed by the rule-oriented nature of Kantian theory. Others like Waldron,50 Dworkin51 and even myself52 have seen Kant’s focus on the fundamental dignity of individuals as ends in themselves and who therefor cannot be used as mere means as more central to his originality. Because I see this focus on dignity and autonomy as more important for political and legal purposes than Kant’s focus on subjecting our actions to the formula for universality, it will be the major focus here.
Kant emphasizes autonomy first and foremost because he argues that it is the locus of all other forms of the good. In the opening of the Groundwork he theorizes on a number of different entities which might be considered good, and concludes that none of them is intrinsically good in themselves. 'ttey at best have instrumental worth. The only thing in existence which is good in itself is the “good will” which wishes to subject itself to the moral law. Kant puts it quite clearly:
Nothing in the world—or out of it!—can possibly be conceived that could be called ‘good’ without qualification except a GOOD WILL. Mental talents such as intelligence, wit, and judgment, and temperaments such as courage, resoluteness, and perseverance are doubtless in many ways good and desirable; but they can become extremely bad and harmful if the person’s character isn’t good—i.e. if the will that is to make use of these · gifts of nature isn’t good. Similarly with · gifts of fortune. Power, riches, honour, even health, and the over-all well-being and contentment with one’s
48 One admirable effort to smooth out these apparent tensions and stay true to the original ambitions of the Kantian project is Allen Wood, Kant's Ethical bought. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999). Another reconstructive effort is Arthur Ripstein. Force and Agency: Kant's Legal and Political Philosophy. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009).
49 See TM. Scanlon What We Owe Each Other: Revised Edition. (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2000).
50 A premiere example of Waldron applying Kantian reasoning, with some Dworkinian theorizing about legal archetypes thrown in, can be seen in Jeremy Waldron “Torture and Positive Law: Jurisprudence for the Whitehouse” Colombia Law Review, 105 (2005).
51 In particular see Ronald Dworkin. Justice for Hedgehogs. (Cambridge, MA. Harvard University Press, 2010).
52 See Matthew McManus. “A Critical Legal Conception of Human Dignity.” Journal of Human Rights, Online, 2019 and Matthew McManus. Making Human Dignity Central to International Human Rights Law: A Critical Legal Argument. (Cardiff, UK: University of Wales Press, 2019).
                                      - 35 -condition that we call ‘happiness’, create pride, often leading to arrogance,
if there isn’t a good will to correct their influence on the mind .. .53
This emphasis on the good will reorients morality away from both Aristotelian teleology and utilitarian consequentialism and insists that the good begins within us rather than externally. The quality of the will which makes it good is a willingness to submit itself to imperatives dictated by practical reason, which Kant calls our duty. The most important of these imperatives flow from our perfect duties to ourselves and others, and therefore take the form of categorical imperatives which apply universally without question or exception. This is sometimes referred to as the "formula for universal law:” that we always act in such a way that we could will the maxim of our action to be universal law. Without a doubt this is Kant’s most well-known contribution to moral theory; revered and endlessly criticized. One of the most well-known objections is that its formalism is too demanding, since-at least as formulated in the Groundwork-it gives little place to very human concerns such as emotions, desires, interests, and our tendency to prioritize affective and proximate relations to those which are more distant. Kantianism of this sort therefore has little to say about the good life.54 But I think this is less true when one situates the formula for universal law in relation to the formula for humanity and the formula of autonomy and the kingdom of ends. Taken together they express a comprehensive liberal vision of the good life.
As mentioned, the relation of this rule or imperative driven deontology to Kant’s emphasis on human beings treated as ends in themselves is
53 Immanuel Kant. Groundwork to the Metaphysics of Morals, trans. H.. J Paton. (New York, NY: Harper Torchbooks, 1964) at pg 1.
54 A partial answer to this would point to Kant’s stressing of imperfect duties both in the Groundwork and virtues in the Metaphysics of Morals. Imperfect duties generate more fungible forms of moral obligation which can be weighed against competing concerns, though of course never ignored fully. Kant also spends a great deal of time discussing the importance of aesthetic and emotional prompts to generate virtues which make it easier for individuals to adhere to the moral law. Much of this relates back to his account of religion and the need to postulate freedom, God, and the immortality of the soul. To a certain extent these theological musings may appear like a regression on Kant’s part. Personally, I see them quite differently, reflecting an existential sensitivity to the problems of meaning in life which would later be taken up by figures like Kierkegaard and Nietzsche. See Immanuel Kant. Religion Within the Limits of Reason Alone: Revised Edition, trans. Robert Merrihew Adams.(Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2018) and Immanuel Kant. Critique of Practical Reason, trans. Werner Pluhar. (Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing, 2002).
                                      - 36 -
the subject of constant debate amongst Kant scholars. I will set out the relation as best I understand it, with the ambition of portraying how I think Kantianism presents a vision of the liberal good life. The formula for humanity asserts that a “human being and generally every rational being exists as an end in itself” and we must therefore “use humanity, whether in our own person or in any other person, always at the same time as an end, never merely as a means.” This is tightly related to Kant’s argument for human dignity; that because we are an end in ourselves we enjoy a status which puts us “beyond price.” What is meant by this is others, and even ourselves, cannot violate our dignity through assessing the value of our life relative to competing concerns. This of course does not mean we cannot use other people as a means to a given end, for instance through economic exchanges to maximize our mutual utility. But these must be consensual transactions engaged in by autonomous actors rather than coerced, even if coercion may appear to produce more optimific aggregated consequences.55 Kant goes on to stress this with the formula for autonomy and the kingdom of ends, which is where his moral theory begins to unevenly move into political theorizing. For Kant, an autonomous polity of rational beings treating one another as ends in themselves and willing the universal law in tandem is the political ideal to strive towards. How to go about institutionally and legally establishing the kingdom of ends is explored in a variety of works by the German philosopher. Interestingly, he goes well beyond the state-centric theorizing of many early modern liberals such as Locke and Hobbes, and is even willing to extend his reasoning into the cosmopolitan realm.
Before elaborating on this point, it is important to note what is particularly liberal about Kantian reasoning. The emphasis on autonomy and the dignity of all is an obvious point of reference. But equally important is Kant’s meta-ethical argument that morality is the result of rational beings oriented by the good will submitting themselves to imperatives
55 There is of course a materialist objection one could make to this Kantian point, which is to question whether economic exchanges in a capitalist system are genuinely all mutually consensual. Particularly if one party owns the means of production and is therefore in a position to negotiate the terms of another’s survival, since the latter is essentially faced with a choice between exploitative laboring for the owner under terms set by them or surviving in destitution. This is an important objection and I shall return to it shortly when examining Marx’s pioneering criticisms of the liberal tradition.
                                      - 37 -given by themselves. 'ttis builds upon the subjectivism of figures like Hobbes but rejects its relativistic conclusions. Indeed, Kant stresses the universality of morality by insisting we not make an exception of ourselves or others when reasoning on what is right. This has a fundamentally egalitarian dimension to it which is broadly consonant with the liberal principle of treating all as equals before the law. No one is to count for nothing, and none can claim special privileges or powers to make an exception of themselves. Most importantly they cannot claim the authority to impose their will upon others who must be respected as ends in themselves. Kant goes on to stress the same for political entities in his essays on cosmopolitanism. These arguments put liberalism on a far firmer philosophical foundation than antecedent figures like Locke who relied on speculative claims about natural rights and questionable metaphysical ruminations about entitlement to property and hence participation in representative government through labor. It insisted that a consistent application of the principle that the equal possession of practical reason generates a right to be treated as a being of equal moral worth to any other.
Kantian politics flows very much from this egalitarian conceit; though sadly Kant himself was often inconsistent in thinking through the implications of his argument.56 As has often been pointed out by authors like Ripstein57 Kant’s political theory is sometimes interpreted uncharitably as being more conservative than it actually is. This is of course an unusual way to understand an author who famously celebrated the French Revolution and (apparently) was only late for his obsessively punctual walk on days he was reading Rousseau. Ripstein points out that Kant actually imposes a stringent set of obligations on the state in order for it to maintain legitimacy. Should it fail to create and maintain the “rightful
56 For instance, while Kant was a critic of imperialism and colonialism that did not prevent him from making some shamefully racist claims. These come out most embarrassingly in his lectures on anthropology, where Kant makes some truly uninformed claims about communities and individuals he would never have encountered as a lifelong inhabitant of Konigsberg. See Emmanuel Eze “The Color of Race: The Idea of Race in Kant’s Anthropology” in	African	Philosophy: A
Critical Reader, ed. Emmanuel Eze. (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 1997) for a very informative look.
57 Arthur Ripstein. Force and Agency: Kant's Legal and Political Philosophy. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009.
                                      - 38 -
condition” respecting the natural rights to autonomy of citizens, it loses the authority to govern and can be replaced by another. The “rightful condition” is of course that sketched out in the Groundwork as the kingdom of ends, where the autonomy of all individuals as universal moral legislators is respected. Indeed, it is from the “innate” right to freedom that all other rights flow. As he put it in The Metaphysics of Morals5*:
There is only one innate right: Freedom (independence from being constrained by another’s choice), insofar as it can coexist with the freedom of
every other in accordance with a universal law.59
Given this, why have a state at all?60 Kant’s argument is that the state is the best means available for protecting and maintaining our right to freedom, and also for protecting the less innate and more positive rights which emerge after a hypothetical social contract. One of the most important of these rights is to political participation as co-legislator of the laws passed by the state. This democratic injunction flows from Rousseau, but is given a distinctively Kantian twist in his insistence that to be treated as an end in ourselves we cannot be subjected to laws which we ourselves did not have a hand in generating. As with Locke, there are unfortunate but indicatory exceptions to this extension of participation. Women, children, and those without the means to sustain themselves are not given the same rights to participation, though Kant bizarrely insists this does not entail disrespect for their freedom as passive members of the state. But it does go well beyond Locke in insisting that representative government by the propertied class is insufficient since we are not entitled to deny the equal worth of propertyless individuals at least at the moral level. Other important rights Kant insists the state protect include property rights to land and objects, the free use of reason in deliberation on
58 This bears some resemblance to Aharon Barak’s later argument that dignity servers as a “mother right” which births subsequent daughter rights. See Aharon Barak. Human Dignity: The Constitutional Value and the Constitutional Right. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2015.
59 Immanuel Kant. The Metaphysics of Morals, trans. Mary Gregor. (United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press, 1996) at pg 30.
60 Some Kantians have criticized Kant’s statism, arguing that a more consistent application of his thinking would lead to supporting anarchism. This is the position of Robert Paul Wolff for example.
                                      - 39 -political, religious and moral issues, and most interestingly for noncitizens, rights to be free from war and to universal hospitality.
This is one of the more innovative elements of Kant’s political project. While his arguments for the state and individual rights within it are not as interesting as other elements of his practical philosophy, the cosmopolitan project he committed himself to near the end of a long and productive life was a distinctive step forward in the enlargement of our moral universe. The essays “Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch” and “Idea For A Universal History With Cosmopolitan Intent” sketch out a vision of the international order which is far more ambitious than what one sees with the statism of earlier liberals. For Kant it is not enough for political authorities to respect the rights of their citizens, whether they exist through nature or come into existence through the social contract. They must also recognize duties to those beyond arbitrary state borders.
As a “philosophical sketch” Kant’s cosmopolitan proposals are rather sleight in the details, particularly in associating his position with other elements of his thinking. None the less there are some inferences we can make based on both his preliminary and definitive articles for attaining perpetual peace. In the second of his preliminary articles which concerns war and the dominion of states, Kant insists that a state is not a piece of property. It is instead a “society of men no one else has any right to command.” Interestingly for a work on cosmopolitanism this is a rather overt insistence on state sovereignty and implies that states enjoy subsidiary rights to autonomy flowing from the freedom of their citizens. This is later confirmed when Kant argues that “no state shall by force interfere with the constitution or government of another state.” Later when discussing standing armies Kant mentions that to pay men to kill or be killed entails “treating them as a mere machines and tools in the hands of another ... and this is hardly compatible with the rights of mankind in our own person.”61 This is a transparent reference to the formula for humanity, and indeed a necessary one since it is difficult to think of any context where mass numbers are used as means to mere ends in a more wicked fashion than war. Later when discussing the definitive articles,
61 Immanuel Kant. Toward Perpetual Peace and Other Essays on Politics, Peace, and History, trans. David Colclasure. (New Haven, CN: Yale University Press, 2006).
                                      - 40 -
Kant builds on the arguments of the Metaphysics of Morals by insisting that the constitution of every state should be republican. This is both for the reasons concerning autonomy highlighted in both the Groundwork and the Metaphysics of Morals, but also because Kant conjectures republican states would be less likely to engage in acts of war against one another:
The only constitution which derives from the idea of the original compact, and on which all juridical legislation of a people must be based, is the republican. This constitution is established, firstly, by principles of the freedom of the members of a society (as men); secondly, by principles of dependence of all upon a single common legislation (as subjects); and, thirdly, by the law of their equality (as citizens). The republican constitution, therefore, is, with respect to law, the one which is the original basis of every form of civil constitution. The only question now is: Is it also the one which can lead to perpetual peace? The republican constitution, besides the purity of its origin (having sprung from the pure source of the concept of law), also gives a favorable prospect for the desired consequence, i.e., perpetual peace. The reason is this: if the consent of the citizens is required in order to decide that war should be declared (and in this constitution it cannot but be the case), nothing is more natural than that they would be very cautious in commencing such a poor game, decreeing for themselves all the calamities of war.62
This is an early formulation of what later became known as democratic peace theory; quite impressive as a speculative point given Kant had few major case studies to point to when he wrote the essay. Finally, Kant makes the argument that states have obligations to non-citizens who are in significant peril. He describes this as a “law of world citizenship” flowing from the “right of a stranger not to be treated as an enemy when he arrives in the land of another.” The contents of this right are to inhabit the land for a temporary period of time and to associate with others. While vague, this anticipates many of the doctrines of non-refoulment found in today’s international refugee law. It also reflects, clearer than any
62 Immanuel Kant. Toward Perpetual Peace and Other Essays on Politics, Peace, and History, trans. David Colclasure. (New Haven, CN: Yale University Press, 2006) at pg. 72.
                                      - 41 -other aspect of Kantian cosmopolitanism, the effort to extend the universe of our moral concerns to the whole of humanity.63
Taken as a whole, the foundational right to freedom and/or autonomy invoked in both the Groundwork and The Metaphysics of Morals has now been extended to a very significant set of daughter rights and jurisgenera-tive legal and politico-institutional arrangements at both the state and international level. Kant is to be respected for taking a more maximal approach to liberty than Madison, Locke, and certainly Hobbes. But his approach does remain highly enmeshed in the limitations of the liberal approach to freedom and democracy which I will criticize more generally in Chap. 2. To an extent Kant himself appears to have been at least partially aware of this. In the Groundwork and the Critique of Practical Reason Kant insists that our freedom is a postulate of transcendental practical reason and owes nothing to the empirical world. But this is in serious tension with his work through the 1790s meticulously arguing for the importance of institutional and political arrangements, insistence that states maintain the “rightful condition,” and his ambitious speculative comments on the importance of Enlightenment and cosmopolitanism. If our freedom is purely transcendental, why then should these factors matter? Kant made a heroic but highly theoretical effort to synthesize such concerns together in the Critique of Judgement in his development of a transcendental approach to art and science and articulating how encountering and interpreting such phenomenal entities mediate our pure and practical reason.64 This would have a significant impact on the romantic cultural movement, but unfortunately says little about how the tension between transcendental freedom and the freedom engendered by good
63 Kant notably has little to say about the rights or dignities of non-human animals, a point which was taken up by Martha Nussbaum in her work on liberalism and animal rights. While some argue that Kant thought we had indirect duties towards non-human animals, they are very limited next to our duties towards humans and ourselves. This is of course because Kant associates moral worth with the rational orientation of the good will, and does not believe animals are capable of this. See Martha Nussbaum. Frontiers of Justice: Disability, Nationality, Species Membership. (Massachusetts: Belknap Press, 2006). Interestingly the Kantian philosopher Christine Korsgaard has recently argued that this is an instance of Kant not following through consistently on his own principles. See Thomas Nagel. “What We Owe A Rabbit.” New York Review of Books, March 21, 2019. https:// www.nybooks.com/articles/2019/03/21/christine-korsgaard-what-we-owe-a-rabbit/.
64 See Immanuel Kant. Critique of Judgement, trans. Nicholas Walker. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2009).
                                      - 42 -
political arrangements are related. I believe this gap indicates a serious limitation not just in Kant’s own framework, but given his importance as the greatest liberal philosopher, within liberalism more generally. It also directly bears on the importance a liberal places on rights; for instance, if they flow from our natural or transcendental freedom how can they ever be taken away or violated? As we shall see later in the book critics of liberal rights picked up on this very quickly; for example by drawing on Hegelian critiques of the Kantian project in the case of Marx. Before we get to that we shall look at the unusual place utilitarian positivism-the great competitor to deontology-has in the history of liberalism and how it responded to some of these issues.
The Utilitarian Turn from Bentham to Mill and Hart
The great enemies of public peace are the selfish and dissocial passions:— necessary as they are—the one to the very existence of each individual, the other to his security. On the part of these affections, a deficiency in point of strength is never to be apprehended: all that is to be apprehended in respect of them, is to be apprehended on the side of their excess. Society is held together only by the sacrifices that men can be induced to make of the gratifications they demand: to obtain these sacrifices is the great difficulty, the great task of government. What has been the object, the perpetual and palpable object, of this declaration of pretended rights? To add as much force as possible to these passions, already but too strong,—to burst the cords that hold them in,—to say to the selfish passions, there—everywhere—is your prey!—to the angry passions, there—everywhere—is your enemy. Such is the morality of this celebrated manifesto, rendered famous by the same qualities that gave celebrity to the incendiary of the Ephesian temple. The logic of it is of a piece with its morality:—a perpetual vein of nonsense, flowing from a perpetual abuse of words,—words having a variety of meanings, where words with single meanings were equally at hand— the same words used in a variety of meanings in the same page,—words used in meanings not their own, where proper words were equally at hand,—words and propositions of the most unbounded signification, turned loose without any of those exceptions or modifications which are so
                                      - 43 -necessary on every occasion to reduce their import within the compass, not only of right reason, but even of the design in hand, of whatever nature it may be.
Jeremy Bentham, Anarchial Fallacies
During the eighteenth century another major figure emerged who was keen to put morality on a rationalistic basis but who came to very different conclusions than Kant. This was Jeremy Bentham, a man who has been called everything from a relentless pioneer to ingloriously being labelled not a real philosopher by Hannah Arendt. Bentham was born in 1748 and lived a long (certainly for the time) life, dying at the age of 84 in 1832. His family was wealthy, and Bentham was considered something of a prodigy in his youth. He trained as a lawyer but never practiced; possibly out of contempt for what he considered the irrationalism of English common law with its various precedents and appeal to tradition. While Bentham is occasionally dismissed as a shill for liberal capi-talism65 because he defended what seems like a starkly selfish view-that the pursuit of happiness is the driver of all human activity-the radical and egalitarian implications of his thinking were also readily apparent. Indeed, Bentham himself was a tireless reformer who was certainly not content to engage in armchair philosophizing. He published plans for prison reform, drafted model constitutions for a variety of states and colonies, commented fiercely on the great issues of the day, founded journals promoting his work, began constructing a Utilitarian movement, and above all wrote voluminously. Part of this may be explained by Bentham’s ego, which was never small, but that does the man a discredit. He genuinely seems to have felt the reforms he wanted were the moral thing to do, and expressed consistent irritation at how many people seemed to reject to obviousness of his ideas. While contemporaneously it is easy to find this
65 This seems to have been Marx’s position when he described the “eden of the innate rights of man” as the world of “freedom equality, property, and Bentham” where each looks only to themselves. This seems to fundamentally misunderstand Bentham’s point about each counting as one and no more than one, but then Marx was never known for being charitable to his opponents. See Karl Marx. Capital Volume One: A Critique of Political Economy, trans. Ernest Mandel (London, UK: Penguin Books, 1990).
                                      - 44 -
brimming self-assurance naive, it is important to not underestimate its novelty for the time.
Bentham’s mature writings tend to be admirably crisp, even tart, in their exposition. This makes interpreting him a deceptively straightforward task. He argues in The Principles of Morals and Legislation that mankind is placed under the jurisdiction of two sovereign masters: pleasure and pain. They alone point to what we ought to do, as well as what we shall do. They serve as both a standard of right and wrong, and an explanation of cause and effect. We remain subject to their “empire” even when we think we have overcome it. This is a striking claim, but not one without significant problems. Much like Kant’s claim—that we are all free and must therefore create institutions to enable our freedom—can seem suspiciously chimerical, one is left wondering why there can be any problem with what we ought to do if what we do is purely determined by the pursuit of pleasure and the avoidance of pain. Bentham’s answer is far more convincing however: while each of us is a self-interested pleasure seeker, the goal of utilitarianism morality is not just the pursuit of our own happiness, but rather the aggregate happiness of all. Interestingly Bentham never seems to take seriously the idea that there might be significant conflict between the two,66 as his book moves swiftly from discussing the role pleasure and pain play in our existence and the kinds of pleasure and pain we experience to formulating the principle of utility; we must pursue the greatest happiness for the greatest number of people, which is also to be the end of government. Good governance takes the form of precisely calculated legislation to generate the greatest aggregate happiness for all.
This is where we can see Bentham’s approach to law and rights come in. The most important work on the former was his Fragment on Government, an acidic attack on Blackstonian approaches to the common law, and Anarchial Fallacies, an unsparing attack on natural rights theorizing (note the pattern). In the former Bentham insists that Blackstone’s
66 Later utilitarians would take this problem much more seriously. For instance, in his Methods of Ethics Sidgwick notes that there could well be a profound discrepancy between what would make us happy as individuals and what would impartially increase aggregate overall utility. The question then becomes how to convince someone governed by the pursuit of their own pleasure and the avoidance of pain to take seriously that of another.
                                      - 45 -pernicious influence on English law posed a serious barrier to a proper understanding of legal science. On Bentham’s interpretation, Blackstone’s Commentaries on the Law of England provided a substantive defense of the two emptiest features of Anglo jurisprudence: its veneration of so called natural rights, and the evolutionary common law. Bentham understood Blackstone’s work to be a defense of the status quo which badly needed reorganizing on the basis of the principle of utility. Bentham believed that the confusions and archaisms of the common law could only be exorcised through a thorough reorganization of the law along the lines of rationalized legal positivism. Law was the product of a sovereign legislator, which in turn must be limited by its obligations to maximize the utility of the entire people. It should not emanate from the whims of a judge, let alone be supposed to emerge from some mystical natural rights foundation.67
This resistance to the authority of the common law and moralism has staunchly democratic connotations for Bentham. Since maintaining sovereign authority was conditional on increasing the utility of the people, and the most effective way to determine what most people want is to simply ask them, the proper political form might naturally appear to be a majoritarian democracy. And indeed, bucking the trend towards deepening conservatism many experience as they age, Bentham transitioned from being a reformer to being something of a radical in calling for representative democracy. He wanted the elimination of royal patronage, substantial extension of the franchise (including to women by 1818), annual elections, and so on. These were all admirable and forward thinking demands which would influence later generations of Utilitarians such as J.S. Mill, who would also defend representative government and women’s rights. However, this defense of democracy was not deontological in the sense that participation was a right to be upheld as good in and of itself. Indeed in Anarchial Fallacies Bentham is scathingly critical of those who invoke natural rights discourse to defend radical democratization.68 This is in part because no government could possibly meet the
67 Jeremy Bentham. Selected Writings on Utilitarianism (Hertfordshire, UK: Wordsworth Editions, 2000).
68 See “Anarchial Fallacies” in Jeremy Bentham. Selected Writings on Utilitarianism (Hertfordshire, UK: Wordsworth Editions, 2000).
                                      - 46 -
obligations for all put forward by natural rights theory, which would mean that its inevitable failures would produce discontent and-as the title suggests-anarchy. An ordered government was one which passed legislation for the common good, based on a hedonistic calculus. The idea that it must adapt itself to the equal rights of all without failure was nonsensical, and ran the risk that small groups might be able to block legislation which would be to the benefit and greater happiness of the majority. This is not to say that people should not have any rights, since a legislator can feel free to create positive rights which are protected in the law. Indeed, Bentham thinks only such positive rights have “any determinate and intelligible meaning.” But this is quite different than theorizing on natural rights which are said to pre-exist law, while the reality is that they are simply arbitrarily established according to the fanciful whims of their proponents.
This frontal assault on natural rights theory was hugely influential and would come to frame much of the forthcoming debates between legal positivists and natural law theorists down until at least the 1950s. Unsurprisingly many of the former also tended to be Utilitarians, though of varying sorts. While positivists and natural law theorists would agree that people should have rights, legal positivists would insist these are largely the creation of law69 while natural law proponents would try and argue they preexist legality in some respects. Positivists would justify this position from a variety of philosophical perspectives. John Austin’s analytical jurisprudence would stress that legal right is a creation of law which imposes correlative duties on others to treat us in a certain manner. As he put it in The Province of Jurisprudence Determined:
But, as I have intimated already, and shall show completely hereafter, there are no laws merely creating rights. There are laws, it is true, which merely create duties: duties not correlating with correlating rights, and which, therefore may be styled absolute. But every law, really conferring a right, imposes expressly or tacitly a relative duty or a duty correlating with the
69 This picture would be complicated by H.L.A Hart in The Concept of Law when he argued that all legal systems must have a “minimum content” of natural law. The point is expressed more strongly in Hart’s paper “Are There Any Natural Rights?” when he argues that there may be a natural right of all individuals to be free. I will discuss this in more detail shortly.
                                      - 47 -right. If it specify the remedy to be given, in case the right shall be infringed, it imposes the relative duty expressly. If the remedy to be given be not specified, it refers tacitly to preexisting law, and clothes the right which it purports to create with a remedy provided by that law. Every law, really conferring a right, is, therefore, imperative: as imperative, as if its only purpose were the creation of a duty, or as if the relative duty, which it inevitably imposes, were merely absolute.70
This model of rights as creatures of law establishing correlative duties was picked up and significantly revised by later utilitarian positivists such as Hart. While Austin argued that a person is a rights holder because he profits from another’s legal duties, Hart-as elsewhere-took a more nuanced perspective. Choice is central to his conception of being a rights holder, and, interestingly enough, links the concept of moral right to legal right in Hart’s thinking. For Hart, a legal right can take two interrelated forms. Firstly, a person may have permission to perform some action without interference. For instance, I have a right to use my property as I wish so long as it is within the bounds of the law. Secondly, a person may have a duty over which a right holder has control. For instance, you have a duty to not use my property without acquiring my permission first. In both cases the benefits of being a rights holder is the power of choice it grants me, in being able to do as I wish and to choose how you will go about performing your duties to me. The relationship between the two is bilateral in that my right to perform an action imposes on another a duty to not interfere with me in the performance of that action unless otherwise stated. This emphasis on choice is important in Hart’s paper “Are There Any Natural Rights” when he makes the complicated claim that liberty is perhaps the sole natural right. This is because individuals are born capable of choice, and more importantly, our freedom is not voluntarily given to us by other people’s actions; as Hart argues other rights are given through the law. This is an interesting and difficult position for a utilitarian to take, since it seems to place choice at the epicenter of Hart’s theory of rights rather than the principle of utility. And indeed, despite identifying with utilitarianism, Hart often seemed to have struggled with his
70 John Austin. The Province of Jurisprudence Determined (and The Uses of the Study of Jurisprudence). (Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing, 1998) at pg 21.
                                      - 48 -
sense of allegiance. This was particularly true after the 1970s, when the publication of A Theory of Justice71 and Anarchy, State and Utopia-two books highly critical of utilitarianism-changed the theoretical landscape in a manner that seemed amenable to some of Hart’s moral leanings.72 I will discuss this more in more detail when describing Hart’s approach to jurisprudence in a later Chapter. But needless to say it remains clear that his official alignment with utilitarian positivism seemed to war frequently with Hart’s own liberal inclinations73 towards supporting rights and freedom in particular, though as I shall discuss below, it is unclear how central that must be to the utilitarian ethos. The suspicion that liberalism and utilitarianism are natural allies owes a great deal to J.S. Mill, who not coincidentally is the favored reference point for Rawls over someone like Bentham. For the remainder of this chapter I will look at this tendency to conflate liberalism and utilitarianism circa a quick look at Mill’s efforts to square the two, before arguing that the conflation largely misses what is essential in the utilitarian outlook. This troubles the argument that the principle of utility is genuinely essential to a liberal approach to rights.
Critics on the left and the right have long tended to think utilitarianism and liberalism go hand in hand.74 Part of the reason for this is the tendency of utilitarians through the 19th and early twentieth century to
71 See H.L.A Hart. “Rawls on Liberty and its Priority.” University of Chicago Law Review, Volume 40, 1973 for the early engagement with the new paradigm.
72 See H.L.A Hart. “Between Utility and Rights.” Columbia Law Review, Vol 79, 1979 for a good example of this too and fro.
73 Nowhere is this tension better expressed than in Hart’s discussions of the regulation of sex, which had a personal dimension for the man. In his writings on the subject he often seems to be taking a fairly standard utilitarian reformist position. But at the same time he comes very close to the deon-tological claim that it is fundamentally wrong for any society to demand conformity to its moral prejudices even if that is what the majority wants. This would seem very much like a demand for self-sacrifice which should not be accepted. While I agree with Hart emphatically, it is not entirely clear how this is consonant with a consistent utilitarian outlook. If it is the case that demanding self-sacrifice would increase aggregate utility, such a morality would seem to demand that it be carried out or at least accepted as a necessary loss for a happier world. See H.L.A Hart. Law, Liberty, and Morality. (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1963).
74 Karl Marx’s caricature of capitalism as the society of Bentham is a paradigmatic example on the left. There have been other criticisms of utilitarianism from the political right, which tend to associate liberalism with a society of utility maximizers eager to upend tradition through the mass expanse of freedom. Perhaps the most famous work on this front is Michael Oakeshott’s Rationalism in Politics, which is a frontal assault on a certain form of rationalistic outlook he associates with liberalism and utilitarianism.
                                      - 49 -become a gradually more liberal movement. Another point, as observed by Richard Posner, is the tendency of classical and neoclassical political economists to adopt the language of utility maximization when describing their new science. The truth is that economics, at least in a capitalist context, is closer to the study of wealth than utility maximization, since commodities and capital flow based on the profit motive and consumer demand rather than being directed to satisfy needs according to a strict moral calculus. Both these developments led to a strange dulling of utilitarianism’s radical edge. From a Benthamite striving to attack our most cherished ideals and subject them to the rigorous demands of the principle of utility, there was a big push to square utilitarianism with liberalism as an ascendant and (sometimes) progressive doctrine.
J.S. Mill, writing in the mid-1800’s, is the paradigmatic figure on this point. Responding to the hard edges of Benthamite utilitarianism, he was determined to cut the principle of utility down from the supreme metric on all moral questions to a general guideline appealed to in the last instance. Mill’s interpretation of utility was also far less analytical than Bentham’s, and included a very important qualitative dimension where the type of pleasures experienced mattered as much as the degree. This is essential to his claim that the liberal rights necessary to ensure our liberty are so important that all other priorities, even those that might be of overwhelming utility to some individuals, should be morally subordinated to the need to protect liberal rights. 'tte basic argument for this position is an expressivist one; that the highest pleasure comes from living a life that is unique to ourselves and enables the full development of our self. Liberty is required to enable citizens to engage in diverse “experiments in living” to see which ways of existing are best and most satisfying.75
This is a moving ideal which I heartily agree with; indeed, the account of human dignity and expressive capabilities I put forward in the last Chapter owes a great deal to Mill’s position. But it remains deeply unclear how much of this Millsian principle owes to scientific utilitarianism a la Bentham and later, more faithful disciples, such as Peter Singer and in a
75 John Stuart Mill. On Liberty and Other Essays, ed. John Gray. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2008) at Chap. 3.
                                      - 50 -
more complex sense Derek Parfit. This is because utilitarianism as I understand it fundamentally seems to be a moral philosophy which advocates dissociation from the self. If necessary, we are to put aside our individual wants and needs and work tirelessly for the advancement of the common good, since that is what the principle of utility demands when aggregated universally and without prejudice. But this produces the problem already indicated, well expressed by Sidgwick in the Methods of Ethics, that one cannot readily have a moral theory which both normatively and descriptively leans so heavily on individual hedonism and which concludes by calling on us to not be individually hedonistic.76 Though we are all driven by the pursuit of pleasure and the avoidance of pain according to the utilitarian outlook, we are to put aside pleasures and assume pains if that is necessary. But it is not clear why anyone would choose to do that, producing what Sidgwick called the profoundest problem in ethics: that we should put aside our selfish needs to advance universal hedonism, but it is not obvious why a hedonist would feel compelled to do so.
Liberal “utilitarians” such as Mill evade the problem by so watering down and qualifying the principles of aggregate utility maximization that it becomes little more than an injunction that we should each live our lives as we see fit. But then this becomes utilitarianism in name only, since individuals living according to this thin philosophy are largely doing as the wish without personally or politically dedicating their time to rationally determining the best way to increase aggregate utility. Alternately one can take a different route a la Peter Singer and insist on holding true to the original ambitions of Benthamite utilitarianism. In which case we are morally required to put aside our own wishes to try and help those who need it, even if that comes at significant or even immense cost to ourselves. This latter form of utilitarianism can seem extremely demanding, but is truer to the radical edge of the tradition. As Bernard Williams observed in his book Ethics there is a sense in which many Utilitarians have tried to avoid such conclusions by showing how utilitarianism meshes with our liberal moral intuitions and political judgements, rather than just biting the bullet and insisting on the need for
76 Henry Sidgwick. The Methods of Ethics. (Indianapolis, IN. Hackett Press, 1981).
                                      - 51 -dramatic reform as Bentham did. In this respect it comes to look less and less distinctive and more and more like a kind of loose liberal consequentialism.77
All this is to say that utilitarianism, despite its ongoing influence, occupies a very strange place in the history of liberalism and rights. It has no doubt made an important contribution along several lines, from the criticisms of natural law and rights, to the defense of positivism, to Hart and Mills’ heroic efforts to marry utility maximization to liberalism. But I do not believe they were ultimately successful in squaring what ultimately will always be a circle. The neoliberals were more accomplished in developing a kind of liberal consequentialism; though as we shall see the consequences of their theories were, for the most part, extremely negative for a huge number of people.
Universal Liberal Rights, Cosmopolitanism, and the Neoliberal State
The brief survey conducted above has introduced many of the varied classical liberal theories on rights in relatively abstract form, from the natural rights perspective of Locke through the deontological reasoning of Kant and the controversial case of utilitarianism. These were all tremendously influential theoretical movements whose impact extended well beyond the confines of a few intellectuals. But as we have seen there were often dramatic inconsistencies and exceptions even within the most rigorous theorizing, where figures like Locke and even cosmopolitan universalists such as Kant made sure to sequester certain groups from full participation in liberal societies. This includes women, ethnic and racial minori-ties—and even majorities in the case of South Africa and other regimes—those of a different sexual orientation and identity, and so on. As Will Kymlicka rightly put it, one of the stories that can be told of liberalism both in theory and in practice is its sometimes radical and often very grudging willingness to gradually extend equal moral concern
77 Bernard Williams. Morality: An Introduction to Ethics. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2012) at pgs 82—90.
                                      - 52 -
and thus equal rights to these groups.78 This brings us to the contradictions at play within contemporary liberal discourse. At the moment one of the most heated disputes are between liberal egalitarians, who favor a deeper extension of equal universal rights to all and are even willing to intervene in wealth redistribution, and the ambitions of neoliberals who wished above all to prevent this from happening. These debates are very much alive and going, and I will be discussing them in far more detail in Chap. 3, paying special attention to the work of Rawls and Hayek. Because of this my analysis of both developments will be relatively brief.
Arguably the first major effort to expand liberal rights to a group they had previously ignored was Mary Wollstonecraft’s Vindication of the Rights ofWomen, which argued that societies would be more just including female voices into the polity and generate happier conditions over-all.79 J.S. Mill carried on this position in his work, inspired by Harriet Taylor, The Subjection of Women.80 But things truly got off the ground in the late nineteenth century, when the various suffragette and anti-racist groups began to flourish and demand that nominally liberal societies live up to their stated principles. Feminist activists demanded the vote and got it from sometimes reluctant legislatures. In the aftermath of the Second World War there was a major effort to include marginalized ethnic and racial groups into liberal societies in a more meaningful manner, often by pointing out how those societies did not live up to their proclaimed standards. The most masterful of such commentaries was given by Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., who relentlessly pointed out that ways the United States had failed to abide by its stated principles. As he put it in his sublime 1968 speech, often called “I’ve Been To the Mountaintop.”
Now about injunctions: We have an injunction and we’re going into court
tomorrow morning to fight this illegal, unconstitutional injunction. All we
say to America is, “Be true to what you said on paper.” If I lived in China
78 Will Kymlicka. “Multiculturalism’s Moral Impulse.” Carnegie Council for Ethics in International Affairs. November 25th 2014. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2W689QD849Y&t=118s.
79 Mary Wollstonecraft. A Vindication of the Rights ofWomen. (New York, NY: Norton Library, 1967).
80 John Stuart Mill. On The Subjection ofWomen, reprinted. In Richard Vandewetering and Lesley Jacobs. John Stuart Mill's The Subjection ofWomen: His Contemporary and Modern Critics. (Delmar, NY: Caravan Books, 1999).
                                      - 53 -or even Russia, or any totalitarian country, maybe I could understand some of these illegal injunctions. Maybe I could understand the denial of certain basic First Amendment privileges, because they hadn’t committed themselves to that over there. But somewhere I read of the freedom of assembly. Somewhere I read of the freedom of speech. Somewhere I read of the freedom of press. Somewhere I read that the greatness of America is the right to protest for right. And so just as I say, we aren’t going to let dogs or water hoses turn us around, we aren’t going to let any injunction turn us around. We are going on.81
At the same time the movement for advancing inclusion based on sexual orientation picked up significant steam, particularly in the 1970s when feminist and LGBTQ groups began to strongly agitate for the decriminalization of same-sex relations and the repeal of anti-sodomy laws. These movements faced significant barriers in their demands for inclusion, with the American Supreme Court ruling as late as the 1980s in Bowers v Hardwick that US states could still pass laws prohibiting same-sex activities. None the less such was the momentum of these movements that by the 2010s same sex marriage was partially or fully legal in dozens of countries across the globe and there was growing acceptance of trans individuals in various spheres of life.
Each of these groups made demands as part of what Michael Ignatieff called the “rights revolution” at the state level.82 But perhaps more dramatic were the efforts to realize something like the Kantian cosmopolitan dream internationally in the aftermath of the Second World War. While there had been significant steps to internationalize rights before this conflict, particularly in the realm of humanitarian law via the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 and the Geneva Convention of 1929, the precursors to the more modern Conventions of the same name, the formation of the United Nations and the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights were far more robust gestures. In 1976 the
81 Dr. Martin Luther King JR. “I’ve Been To the Mountaintop: Address Delivered at Bishop Charles Mason Temple.” The Martin Luther King Jr Research and Education Center, April 1968 https:// kinginstitute.stanford.edu/king-papers/documents/ive-been-mountaintop-address-delivered-bishop-charles-mason-temple.
82 See Michael Ignatieff. The Rights Revolution: Second Edition. (Toronto, ON: House of Anansi Press, 2007).
                                      - 54 -
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the more controversial International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights came into force. Taken together these documents constitute what some call an international Bill of Rights, though by no means all member states of the United Nations agree to be bound by all the provisions. Since then a significant number of international instruments concerning human rights, of varying strength and focus, have been drafted, ratified, and brought into domestic law,, with the most recent being the Convention on the Rights of Persons With Disabilities in 2009. In 1993, with the end of the Cold War, a thaw took place which enabled a more liberal rights agenda to advance internationally. This was one of the reasons sufficient support could be found to appoint a permanent UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, who is responsible for investigating and “enforcing” compliance with rights guaranteed under international law.
One of the groups who looked upon these efforts with mixed feelings were the neoliberals, who shared many of these global aspirations as proponents of international human rights but were concerned about the impact such movements might have with respect to property rights. In particular figures like Hayek were deeply worried that international human rights law might be a precursor to demanding all states adopt a social-democratic model which he felt would be disastrous; admittedly not an idle worry given the many references to economic and social rights within the emerging international instruments. They therefore engaged in a concerted effort to advance a very different model of rights which emphasized the importance of property, rights to capital mobility, and even political rights for various capitalist firms.83 The latter was especially important given the end of the Cold War and the collapse of a systematic alternative to capitalism—however totalitarian and ineffective—dramati-cally increased the power of business relative to labor. Driven by neoliberal international instruments like the WTO, capital was now free to move as it pleased and holders of the levels of power over capital—the extremely wealthy—could even demand a say in regulations and laws which impacted economic practices. This constituted a dramatic a shift
83 See Jessica Whyte. The Morals of the Market: Human Rights and the Rise of' Neoliberalism. (London, UK: Verso Books, 2019).
                                      - 55 -away from both the Hobbesian model of state sovereignty and the expansive human rights-based systems. Other institutions such as the IMF and World Bank deepened this trend by tying loans and aid money to structural adjustment programs, often overruling the democratic agendas of states in order to implement dramatic cuts to services which had previously been provided communally or by the state. The result was a rush of privatization in many developing countries; some of whom benefitted more than others from the enforcement of the so-called Washington Consensus on capitalism. Much the same happened in developed states, with the ascendency of the European Union as an elite-driven effort to generate economic and cultural integration, underpinned by controversial financing laws. I will now look at this in greater detail.
The Constraints of Neoliberal Society
One notable gap in the earlier discussion was any analysis of neoliberalism it itself, which managed the neat trick of embodying everything that was worst in the liberal tradition while upholding few of its virtues.84 This wasn’t because an analysis of neoliberalism was unimportant. Rather it is sufficiently central to warrant sustained analysis in this Chapter, after which I will put forward my own criticisms of liberalism as reflected in neoliberal societies at the beginning of the twenty-first century. This is for two reasons. The first is that my own position is in some respects the inverse of neoliberalism, circa its emphasis on democracy and equality. The second is that, much like any good critical legal theorist, I do not wish to engage in a mere abstract critique of liberal theorizing as it historically presents itself. It is crucially important to demonstrate both why neoliberalism became a hegemonic force across the globe, and why its failures contributed to opening a new window of opportunity for radical transformation. This will segue neatly into the constructive portion of the book which theorizes on how to radicalize what is best in liberalism while chucking its anti-democratic and inegalitarian remnants.
84 Its internationalism is one notable exception.
                                      - 56 -
Neoliberalism is an eminently contentious term, which until very recently was largely rejected by many of its purported adherents.85 This is in part because neoliberals often preferred to characterize themselves as defenders of the classical liberal position, in spite of the dramatic changes to its theoretical and practical dimensions they proposed. It is also because the term has frequently been used as a pejorative term directed by critics on the left towards anyone with anti-welfarist views. This critical fluidity contributed to a widespread disdain for the term until it came under attack not just from traditional enemies on the political left, but from those on the right as well. Appropriately this occurred just as the progressive literature on the subject was taking a major step forward, pioneered by figures like Quinn Slobodian, Wendy Brown, and Jessica Whyte, which complicates the somewhat more one-dimensional narrative put forward by Foucault early on.86
Neoliberalism began in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries as an intellectual movement concerned about the rising popularity of movements on the political left and, later, the populist political right.87 By the 1970s it ascended to become a hegemonic “logic” of global power and influence, pushed by movers and shakers such as Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Regan. During its heyday from 1989 to 2008, it seemed sufficiently unstoppable to warrant Thatcher’s dictum that there was “no alternative.” The post-recessionary period has shaken both this ideological faith and the institutions which backed it up. None the less it remains sufficiently powerful to warrant criticism from all ends of the political
85 Milton Friedman is a notable exception. See Milton Friedman. “Neo-Liberalism and Its Prospects” in Farmand. Feb 17th 1951.
86 See Michel Foucault. The Birth of Biopolitics: Lectures at the College De France 1978—1979, trans. Graham Burchell. (New York, NY: Picador, 2008).
87 Though as Whyte and Slobodian point out, the neoliberals were often quite a bit more comfortable with right wing authoritarianism and even proto-totalitarianism than its left wing competitors. For instance, Whyte references Von Mises’s comments that in the 1920’s “it cannot be denied that Fascism and similar movements aiming at the establishment of dictatorships are full of the best intentions and that their intervention has, for the moment, saved European civilization.” The reference is to Ludwig Von Mises. Liberalism: The Classical Tradition. Quoted in Jessica Whyte. The Morals of the Market: Human Rights and the Rise of Neoliberalism. (London, UK: Verso Books, 2019) at pg 54. Then of course there is Friedman’s and Hayek’s endorsement or at least passive acceptance of Pinochet, and Ropke’s later paleo-conservative conversion to race based politics. See Quinn Slobodian. Globalists: The End of Empire and the Birth Of Neoliberalism. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2018).
                                      - 57 -spectrum. At the heart of neoliberalism was a rejection of so-called “collectivism.” Though the term collectivism is notoriously ambiguous, it was frequently invoked by figures like Von Mises and Hayek to describe any ideology which sought to use state or other forms of power to direct state resources towards the general welfare. In the early days of the movement, this was often given a rather hyperbolic, even teleological flavour; despite the attraction of neoliberals to Darwinian concepts of spontaneous order. To the original neoliberals the ideological conviction that power should direct life—particularly economic—outcomes was sometimes motivated by benign intentions concerning social justice, though it certainly wasn’t in the case of the Nazis. Whatever the intent, the result was always the same. Interference with the market would lead to a gradual corrosion of property rights, the corner stone on which the house of human rights generally stood, and was therefore the key step on the road to totalitarian serfdom. There were many different accounts of this given. Perhaps the most important is the calculability problem, which described how state efforts to engage in economic planning would result in false calculations about value. This would in turn lead to totalitarian practices.
'tte argument runs as follows.88 Socialist planners would aspire to calculate supply to meet citizen’s needs, without recognizing the impossibility posed by accurately measuring the value of goods as determined through a lengthy production process and the actual demands of consumers. Markets do this quite effectively through adjustments in prices, which contribute to the emergence of a spontaneous order whose working is directed as though by a Smithian invisible hand. But socialist planners have to effectively guess at the values involved in their calculations, since no human or even artificial mind can possibly fathom all the information involved in thousands of producers and millions of consumers creating and enjoying countless commodities. When they guess wrong, the result will be instability and disincentives which will in turn lead to impoverishment. But rather than blaming themselves for this failure, socialist planners will at best claim the problem is they still lack sufficient control of the economy or at worst blame “class enemies” and disruptors. Hayek goes even further, arguing that the problems arise not just from
88 Thank you to Steve Lafleur for reading over an early iteration of this discussion.
                                      - 58 -
failures in economic calculation but due to the psychological conceits of intellectuals attracted to socialism.89 They fall victim to the hubristic conceit that just because the economy is established by human interaction, we are intelligent enough to understand how it operates and therefore direct its processes. When socialist intellectuals find themselves facing the real-world consequences of their failures, they will run from the truth and demand further power, effacing more and more individual rights until all control is left in the hands of the state.
The general contours of this narrative were broadly accepted by the major neoliberal thinkers, though there were considerable differences on the details. Early in his career studying business cycles, Hayek seemed largely committed to using empirical data to vindicate Von Mises’ more positivistic interpretation of the market. Later he seems to have adopted a more neo-Kantian position, characterizing the market as a sublime object about which we can have some phenomenal insight through modest application of reason but can never know in and of itself. Hayek also accepted that the market might fail of its own accord, since even capitalist actors would sometimes fail to anticipate its ups and downs. Milton Friedman was also less hostile than either Hayek or Von Mises towards state oversight of monetary policy, and was even willing to allow some modest efforts at securing a minimal standard of living for all. But all the neoliberals were convinced that any large-scale efforts to engage in economic planning of the type desired by socialist and later Keynesian—the two are occasionally and crudely conflated by the more partisan disci-ples—was dangerous at best and proto-totalitarian at worst.
This of course did not mean that the neoliberals were opposed to all forms of state organization or even the communal enforcement of mores. Earlier critics of neoliberalism tended to focus on the way neoliberals sought to recast all spheres of life in the image of the market, even recreating individual subjects as miniature entrepreneurs. And to a certain extent accusations of monological economism can sting.90 When
89 See F.A Hayek. 7The Road to Serfdom: 7The Definitive Edition. (Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press, 2007).
90 Michael Sandel criticizes some of the more extreme examples of market logic penetrating even intimate spheres of life quite effectively. See Sandel, Michael. “What Money Can’t Buy: The Tanner Lectures.” (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1998).
                                      - 59 -neoliberal theorists suggest that personalized gift giving constituted a form of economic irrationalism, or describe marriage in primarily contractarian terms it is easy to roll your eyes.91 And in practice they were highly successful at dismantling many state services in the name of greater market flexibility, transforming communal into private goods. One of the most infamous examples is the explosion of common interest developments in lieu of providing cheap public housing.92 Other efforts were less successful or not even attempted; for all her rhetoric of “individuals must look after themselves” Thatcher never tried to break up the British NHS for a variety of political reasons. But the neoliberals were also quite content with the use of state and even international power to go beyond laissez faire and try and establish viable socio-cultural conditions for the establishment of markets. Nowhere was this better demonstrated than the billions spent by institutions such as the IMF and the World Bank to readjust the societies of the developing world, tying loans to state willingness to both open the economy to trade and direct funds to market friendly politics and infrastructure while refraining from providing public services. Infamously some neoliberals were willing to tolerate or even endorse state authoritarianism a la Pinochet and apartheid South Africa on condition that they operate in a market friendly manner and maintain order.93
The justifications for such seemingly contradictory behavior varied. Some neoliberals criticized the old Smithian conception of the “invisible hand” guiding the market as an excessively theological conceit. They acknowledged that state power needed to operate in tandem with markets to secure “liberty.” Others like Hayek suggested there was a devil’s bargain to be made, and that sometimes states needed to impose limits on freedom where the masses sought to engage in totalitarian activities. His distinction between liberal authoritarianism or dictatorship and
91 See Sandel, Michael. “What Money Can’t Buy: The Tanner Lectures.” (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1998).
92 See Ian Shapiro. “Privatizing Government I: Utilities, Eminent Doman, and Local Government.” Power and Politics, Yale University Courses, October 17th 2019 https://www.youtube.com/ watch?v=9dULs7w8b-0&list=PLh9mgdi4rNeyViG2ar68jkgEi4y6doNZy&index=8.
93 R?pke, Willhelm “South Africa: An Attempt at a Positive Appraisal,” Schweizer Monatsheff, No 2, May 1964.
                                      - 60 -
totalitarianism is representative here.94 Paleoconservatives like Murray Rothbard may have found themselves less attracted to neoliberal doctrines for their promises of freedom and prosperity than as ammunition to push reactionary views. I think is most key though is that the experience of the twentieth century shook the faith of neoliberals in the capacity of capitalist markets to be self-sustaining and reproducing. They were very aware that, while the market may have emerged through an evolutionary process, it was competing in a fight with opponents who were determined and capable of bringing it down. The lessons of fascism and communism, not to mention the near miss of welfarist Keynesianism, were clear. Markets needed to be insulated and sustained if they were to survive.
This is where one sees the curious moralism of many neoliberal figures come in; a frequent source of irritation for those of a more libertarian bent.95 While often privately agnostic, many of the neoliberals expressed commendation for Christian civilization and the role stabilizing mores played in maintaining order. They also bemoaned the impact of welfarism on personal character, characterizing it as an affront to human dignity and the promotion of idleness. Consequently, they also presented their policies as not merely about economic prosperity and even freedom. The argument was that civilization itself was at stake, with the temptations of collectivism a threatening force which undermined family, nation, and civilization as a whole. Margaret Thatcher’s 1975 speech is indicative.
Most of us were brought up to have a set of standards for living. We worked hard and conscientiously; we lived within our income; we didn’t borrow to buy goods we couldn’t afford. We put a bit by for a rainy day. Children were taught to be polite and to respect others; always to stick up for their family; we were clearly taught what was right and what was wrong and to uphold the law, and support the police. We paid our taxes honestly. And things didn’t end there—it was part of our life to do some voluntary work and to take a pride in our local community. These social ties and standards that hold a community together have been dangerously weakened. Who
94 El Mercurio. “Interview with F.A Hayek.” ElMercurio, April 12th 1981.
95 Jason Brennan. Libertarianism: What Everyone Needs to Know. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2012).
                                      - 61 -profits now? Not the people who have always tried to pull their weight. But those who use their weight to push others around. But people will not put up with this much longer. I sense that the limits are being reached now. Taxpayers and ratepayers and the self-employed are restive—and less inclined to go on paying up without appeals and arguments and even demonstrations. Our prime task, then, if we are to restore hope to the disillusioned is to show them that we will take up their cause. Our job is not to sit on the sidelines while a Labour Government widens the divisions in the country and erodes personal responsibility. Our job is to unite the nation, lead it to victory and so revive the true values of our society.96
Part of this moralism may have been merely rhetorical. Conservatives and neoliberals have long acknowledged being tarred with the label of being the “nasty party” with the “nasty ideology”. More savvy neoliberals recognized that if they focused exclusively on the need to upend public spending on the destitute for the sake of economic prosperity they would risk coming across as selfish and indifferent. By framing the discussion in moral terms about individual property rights, personal responsibility and the “true values of our society” they could push such critics onto the defensive. But there was a deeper and more conservative dimension to the neoliberal project, well discussed by Wendy Brown. This was an emphasis on the Burkean function of shared traditions and values. As conceived by neoliberals, traditional values inspired individuals to largely look after themselves and regard any form of aid as necessarily an act of private altruism. Tradition also provided order without the need for enforcement, since individuals were prone to disciplining themselves according to the accepted values of their society. It contributed to the development and preservation of ordered liberty, which figures like Stephen Harper prize greatly.97 This showcases the tighter connection between conservatism and neoliberalism which was largely obscured by the consistent rhetoric about freedom, the tensions of which I will now explore in more detail.
96 Margaret Thatcher. “Speech to Conservative Central Council.” March 15 th 1975 https://www. margaretthatcher.org/document/102655.
97 Stephen Harper. Right Here, Right Now: Politics and Leadership in the Age of Disruption. (United States: Penguin Random House Canada, 2018).
                                      - 62 -
Neoliberalism drew on many variants of classical liberal theory to justify its approach to society. Broadly speaking I would argue that the neoliberals were committed to what John Gray would call a form of Kantian consequentialism, though how much this synthesis actually owes to the more radical dimensions of Kant or the utilitarian’s thinking is eminently questionable.98 They believed that establishing a society based on extensive freedom, understood primarily in economic terms, backed up and limited by the rule of law, would ultimately be beneficial to all. But they were also aware, as Kant and Bentham were not, that creating such a society would require more than leaning on metaphysically contentious claims about practical reason or fusion of descriptive psychological and normative claims about the influence of pleasure and pain. The state and even international institutions could be used to establish the conditions for the flourishing of the market and even constitute new subjectivities which would conceive of themselves first and foremost as entrepreneurs. All this had to be achieved while insisting on both the reasonableness of the neoliberal worldview, and in the face of the sublime and even theological quality of the market which made it impossible to describe its operations accurately. This was obviously a tense theoretical position. It required reconciling an emphasis on freedom with support for tradition and the law, a dedication to reason with skepticism that we could ever truly know the market, privileging spontaneous order while calling for a massive reshaping of the global order, and even creating new kinds of subjects. The more intelligent neoliberals like Hayek were gifted at synthesizing these disparate threads together, though the cracks in both theory and practice were always gleefully pointed out by opponents (including myself). In practice though the neoliberals were wildly successful in establishing a hegemonic global order which functioned more or less without serious competition for 30 or so years. This is an enduring testament to the disjunction between theory and practice. While theoretical tensions may be a source of intellectual weakness or even contradiction, in practice they come across not as tensions but ideological flexibility enabling an overlapping consensus and coalition building.
98 John Gray. Hayek on Liberty: Third Edition. (London, UK: Routledge, 1998).
                                      - 63 -For all that though neoliberalism remains very open to criticism as an especially harsh and austere iteration of the classical liberal tradition; particularly for the twentieth century. Its anti-democratic and anti-egalitarian dimensions were initially easier to ignore in a Cold War context when brazen hypocrisy was the order of the day, and the anticipation that citizens would accept increasing inequality in return for burgeoning economic conditions seemed borne out through the 1990s and early 2000s. But in 2008 not only did this promise fall apart in the ruins of the Great Recession, the ways that inequality connected to power politics in order to undermine democracy were vividly displayed. Over the objections of majoritarian opinion, state officials operated to bail out major financial institutions to the tune of hundreds of billions of tax dollars while often imposing harsh austerity measures on citizens who paid those taxes and now saw their life savings go up in smoke. The generation that came of age in this period will not forget such snake oil plutocracy.
Conclusion
I will have considerably more to say about these developments in Chap. 3, particularly about both their international and domestic impact on democracy. But for now I will say that the status of liberal rights at the dawn of the twenty-first century was quite ambiguous. On the one hand liberalism had defeated its two major ideological competitors—fascism on the right and communism on the left—which left many feeling it was a hegemonic force which could never be overturned. This was at the root of theses like Francis Fukuyama’s famous claim about the “end of history.” Throughout the long twentieth century liberalism gradually advanced, with the resulting recognition of the rights of many groups who earlier liberal theorists had excluded from consideration; women, racial minorities and marginalized peoples, and LGBTQ individuals. A formidable array of international institutions had also been set up to advance liberalism on a global scale, aided by a variety of international instruments protecting (theoretically at least) a robust package of liberal rights.
                                      - 64 -
At the same time there were very serious disputes which were being papered over by the triumphalism which marked the end of the Cold War. As Edmund Fawcett points out, liberalism has always been torn between those who wished to grant the people more significant democratic rights and those who felt granting too much control to the people could well be dangerous. Just as significantly, liberals had gone back and forth between those who felt liberalism should take economic and social rights seriously and figures who disputed the existence of any such rights, or, more accurately, who held that no consistent liberal philosophy could uphold economic and social rights since that would seriously compromise a commitment to property and capitalism which were genetically inseparable from the liberal outlook. By the end of the twentieth century many liberal egalitarians wanted to push for both a more democratic and a more economically equal liberalism. But they were largely unsuccessful due to the ascendency of neoliberalism both domestically and internationally. For figures like Hayek or Friedman, the social justice adventurism of egalitarianism was hostile to the essential spirit of liberalism, which was to enable freedom—above all economic freedom—through the law. Liberalism should do no more than that, since any efforts could well place bricks on the “road to serfdom” by enabling state power to concentrate in the hands of invasive technocrats who lacked the knowledge required to enact their utopian schemes, and would therefore demand more and more power to pursue goals destined to end in failure.
It is now time to move onto a new topic. For as long as liberalism has existed it has had its enemies. Initially these were mainly reactionaries such as Robert Filmer who were determined to uphold ancient feudal and absolutist regimes against demands for rights to participation and liberty. These figures are largely of historical interest now. But starting in the eighteenth century with the work of Rousseau, more innovative and dangerous criticisms were launched at every element of liberal doctrines, including its model of rights. Not coincidentally, this began around the same time as liberalism began to move out of dense works of philosophy and to have an actual political and cultural impact. This was of course a victory for liberalism in every sense of the word, but it also meant its disputes were no longer purely political. Liberals now had something to lose; or gain if you were one of the critics of course. While the end of the
                                      - 65 -twentieth century seemed to mark the final triumph of neoliberalism, things have not proven so simple with the rise of post-modern conservatism and the resurgence of democratic socialism as alternatives to the status quo. To understand these developments better, it will be useful to look at the historical critics of liberalism who anticipated the reactions we are witnessing now.

 2
Critics of Liberal Rights
Arguments Against Liberal Rights from the Left and the Right: Origins in Rousseau and Burke
As highlighted before, liberalism has long had its fair share of friendly and utterly dogmatic critics. Many were reactionary and religious figures who were keen to dispute the alleged atheism or amoralism within protoliberal and liberal theories. Often times these authors engaged in well-known debates, whether one is thinking of Hobbes’ spat with John Bramhall, Locke’s debate with Robert Filmer in the first Treatise, Kant’s efforts to avoid drawing the ire of Prussian censors, and of course Bentham’s arguments with just about everybody about everything. Mill entered into a long series of hostile back and forths with a number of critics, particularly those who took issue with his shocking arguments about women’s suffrage.1 Most of these are largely of historical interest by this point, though as we shall, figures on the new postmodern right in the
1 For a valuable reference see John Stuart Mill. On The Subjection of Women, reprinted. In Richard Vandewetering and Lesley Jacobs. John Stuart Mill’s The Subjection of Women: His Contemporary and Modern Critics. (Delmar, NY: Caravan Books, 1999).                                      - 67 -M. McManus, A Critical Legal Examination of Liberalism and Liberal Rights, Palgrave Studies in Classical Liberalism, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61025'8_2
                                      - 68 -
twenty-first century lodge grenades which would be familiar to these earlier critics. Part of this can be chalked up to the fact that liberals were initially calling for radical changes, which meant that critics had the advantage or upholding a status quo which may well have appeared natural or at the very least safer than any alternative. But by the eighteenth century things had dramatically changed. Influenced by liberal theorizing, but also the advent of a literate bourgeois public sphere2 and affective exposure to relatively new literary genres like the novel,3 liberalism began to become less an esoteric theory partially advanced in a few Western European quasi-republics and constitutional monarchies. It was evolving into a revolutionary force with the power to topple ancient regimes and remake the world in a new image. When the young Hegel was apocryphally writing the Phenomenology ofSpirit and saw Napoleon4 march into Jena, the idealist is said to have claimed the world spirit was marching into Germany. Liberalism, or at least a modern way of life, was on the march and the old world and its calcified regimes was falling before it. It was around this time that the first genuinely novel critiques of liberalism and liberal rights began to emerge. As liberalism gained power and influence as a guiding ideology, it also found new enemies who understood that one could not simply appeal to the status quo to defeat it. Novel arguments were needed, and they would emerge on very different sides of the political spectrum.
2 See J?rgen Habermas. The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An Inquiry into a Category of Bourgeois Society, trans. Thomas Burger (Boston, MA: MIT Press, 1991).
3 Lynn Hunt makes the persuasive and innovative historical argument that academics-such as myself-put too much stock on the influence of liberal theorizing and political agitation for rights when trying to understand the cultural drift towards supporting liberal democracy as a political form. Marshalling an admirable wealth of historical data, she insists that the affective association with others generated through new artistic forms like the novel also played a major role. Individuals could now see themselves in (fictional) others and empathize with their problems. This broke down social barriers. I would go further than Hunt and push her thesis to also claim that the later consequence of this development was the formulation of an expressivist Romantic outlook which married nicely to liberalism. The novel as a genre helped generate an emphasis on the inner life of individuals, and generated deeper demands for its expression—even if that was opposed by the powers that be. See Lynn Hunt. Inventing Human Rights: A History (New York, NY: WW Morton a Company, 2007).
4 Of course Napoleon turned out to be considerably less liberal and more authoritarian than his initial claims to embody the French revolution suggested.                                      - 69 -The first major critic of liberalism to emerge was Jean Jacques Rousseau; to my mind one of the most enigmatic figures in the history of Western philosophy and politics. I say enigmatic not because Rousseau wrote in a particularly challenging manner. Indeed, he is almost too good a writer; his electrifying prose and imagery have led generations of readers to overinvestment and sensationalism. What makes his work challenging to interpret are its many dimensions. At times Rousseau seems almost like a conservative, pining nostalgically for an earlier period of communal association and shared sentiments which has been destroyed by the onrush of modernity. At other points we meet Rousseau the hyper-individualist, who rejects the conformity of society and demands absolute freedom from its authoritarian impulses. Sometimes Rousseau is the most stalwart democrat one could imagine; insisting that Hobbes, Locke and others do not go nearly far enough in calling for political participation from all in creating the laws which are to govern them. Then there are his chilling observations that the stated interests and opinions of individuals as individuals may not matter all the much, since they are misguided and flawed. In such cases the general will, an opaque concept said to embody the real will of the people through pursuit of their genuine rather than perceived interests, can “force” individuals to be free. Such observations can make it very easy to see why fascist political theorists such as Carl Schmitt were so interested in Rousseau,5 and why Berlin and his followers flirted with calling him an intellectual godfather to counter-Enlightenment authoritarianism and perhaps even twentieth century totalitarianism.6
Whatever else Rousseau was, he was certainly interesting, and has an interesting relationship with liberalism to boot. In his earliest works, particularly the prize-winning Discourse on the Arts and Sciences and the now more well-known and readily mocked Discourse on the Origins of Inequality, Rousseau can come across as a strangely reactionary figure. He
5 See Carl Schmitt. Constitutional Theory, trans. Jeffrey Seitzer. (Durham, NC. Duke University Press, 2008) for his most sustained analysis of Rousseau.
6 See “Two Concepts of Liberty” in Isaiah Berlin. The Proper Study of Mankind: An Anthology of Essays, ed. Henry Hardy and Roger Hausheer. (New York, NY: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1997). While Berlin often aspires to be neutral when describing the positive freedom formulated by Rousseau and contrasting it with the negative freedoms of classical liberalism, his reticence on this point often shines through.
                                      - 70 -
has little good to say about modernity and Enlightenment, endlessly castigating its corrupting influence on human beings. Rousseau also bases this critique on a nostalgic and hypothetical past which looks almost Edenic in its contours. In contrast to the gloomy state of nature presented by Hobbes or the workmanlike dryness of Locke, Rousseau presents the state of nature as a beneficent place. Before we entered in modern society, life was generally quite good for human beings. Moreover, we existed in a purer state of innocence, uncorrupted by the vices of amour-propre. This might well seem to provide ready support to conservative critics wishing to demand a return to an earlier and more traditional way of life; after all, didn’t Adam and Eve crave nothing so much as a return to the wholesome light of God’s presence?
But Rousseau’s theory is only Edenic on the surface. The Discourse does indeed present the state of nature as a time of innocence, but it is also impossible to return to it, whether through the grace of God or our own initiative. This is because our nature and relations have been so warped since this period the only route is forward and not back. Rousseau’s speculative history contains many moments of irrevocable transition. But none are as strikingly presented as his argument about the establishment of private property as the key moment where things went sour. Rousseau spares none of his rhetorical abilities in presenting this as a great evil which has condemned us since:
THE first man who, having enclosed a piece of ground, bethought himself of saying This is mine, and found people simple enough to believe him, was the real founder of civil society. From how many crimes, wars and murders, from how many horrors and misfortunes might not any one have saved mankind, by pulling up the stakes, or filling up the ditch, and crying to his fellows, “Beware of listening to this impostor; you are undone if you once forget that the fruits of the earth belong to us all, and the earth itself to nobody.” But there is great probability that things had then already come to such a pitch, that they could no longer continue as they were; for the idea of property depends on many prior ideas, which could only be                                      - 71 -acquired successively, and cannot have been formed all at once in the
human mind.7
With the establishment of private property came an advance in our desires beyond the simple needs which could be readily furnished from the earth. In particular, humans began to desire a feeling of superiority over other animals, and eventually over each other. Of course, as Hegel8 and Levinas were later to point out, this feeling lies at the root of much human conceit and suffering. The feeling of superiority we wish to have can only be achieved through reducing another to a lesser status, at its pitch to a mere object which exists only for us. But an object so reduced can never give us the recognition required to stabilize our sense of superiority: for how can one feel particularly empowered by overcoming someone who is regarded as worthless or even a mere object without interior subjectivity. The consequence of this malignant dialectic, for Rousseau and his many progeny, was a constant desire for recognition which could never be reconciled without the establishment of real equality between individuals. Of course as De Beauvoir9 and less optimistic commentators later observed, the push for such reconciliation through achieving recognition is often barred by various forms of psychic resistance; since it would mean surrendering our sense of superiority—and the deep but self-immolating feelings of control it provides—and accepting the other as an equal with full agency. Few of us are capable of doing so within bourgeois liberal society according to Rousseau.
Therein comes the link to the political dimensions of Rousseau’s project in The Social Contract. It is immediately clear how Rousseau intends to differentiate himself from contractarian liberal predecessors such as Hobbes and Locke. The first Chapter of Leviathan opens with a metaphysical discussion of sense, and the Second Treatise On Government with an unforgivably dry summary of the First Treatise and a brief summary of political power and rights. The first chapter of The Social Contract is a call
7 Jean-Jacques Rousseau. The First and Second Discourses, trans. Roger D. Masters and Judith R. Masters (Boston, MA: Bedford-St. Martins, 1964).
8 And Marx of course but we will get to him in the next section.
9 Simone de Beauvoir. The Second Sex: Compl?te Edition, trans. Constance Borde. (New York, NY: Vintage Books, 2011).
                                      - 72 -
to arms: “man is born free and everywhere he is in chains.”10 The rhetorical and imagistic distinctions are not trivial. Hobbes’s book is fixated on analytical precision, and Locke’s to subordinate political power to natural rights and property. Rousseau’s demands are revolutionary, and potentially impossible to achieve. In a sense freedom and political authority must achieve a seamless integration through ensuring, as Kant would later pick up, that the only laws and institutions which govern citizens are those which they have given to themselves. The problem with such a position, as Schmitt11 pointed out in his surprisingly positive and unsurprisingly dark appraisal, is that such a totalizing demand runs counter to the majoritarian—and in the case of Madison even anti-marjoritarian— structures of liberal democracy. Madisonian liberalism, like the Montisquean division of powers, was committed to dividing up the potential demos to prevent one faction from gaining sufficient power to impose itself on others. Rousseau goes the entirely opposite direction by insisting not only must there be no factions, but there must be complete uniformity of the collective will in order for authority to maintain legitimacy. But this is an impossible demand in practice, since the corrupt interests of selfish individuals will often incline them to legislate on what is beneficial to themselves rather than what may be in the collective interest. This is where Rousseau’s infamous arguments about the general will come in. The general will is emphatically not simply the aggregated wills of all citizens. It occupies an ambiguous, almost metaphysical stature in Rousseau’s thinking as something approximating the true will of the collective directed towards its objective interests. As Rousseau puts it in The Social Contract
Apart from this primitive contract, the vote of the majority always binds all the rest. This follows from the contract itself. But it is asked how a man can be both free and forced to conform to wills that are not his own. How are the opponents at once free and subject to laws they have not agreed to. I retort that the question is wrongly put. The citizen gives his consent to all the laws, including those which are passed in spite of his opposition, and
10 Jean Jacques Rousseau. The Social Contract. (London, UK: Penguin Books, 1968) at pg 6.
11 Carl Schmitt. Constitutional Theory, trans. Jeffrey Seitzer. (Durham, NC. Duke University Press, 2008).                                      - 73 -even those which punish him when he dares to break any of them. The constant will of all the members of the State is the general will; by virtue of it they are citizens and free. When in the popular assembly a law is proposed, what the people is asked is not exactly whether it approves or rejects the proposal, but whether it is in conformity with the general will, which is their will. Each man, in giving his vote, states his opinion on that point; and the general will is found by counting votes. When therefore the opinion that is contrary to my own prevails, this proves neither more nor less than that I was mistaken, and that what I thought to be the general will was not so. If my particular opinion had carried the day I should have achieved the opposite of what was my will; and it is in that case that I should not have been free.12
What then does Rousseau have to say about liberal rights? Rousseau agrees with Hobbes rather than Locke that the state of nature is a state of equality, though in this case benevolent equality rather than the warre of all against all. We enjoy an unlimited right to all things, but this is of course also available to everyone. This individual freedom would seem, on a Berlinian reading, to be entirely compromised in a Rousseauean state since it is subordinated to the general will. And I must admit it is hard to sometimes interpret Rousseau in any other way. To the extent that individual rights should exist, they are the product of the sovereign general will granting them so long as such rights are in the interest of all. They are therefore in no sense to be a check on sovereign power. However there is a way of rescuing Rousseau’s argument from this totalizing impetus which was sketched out in part by Kant and later formalized by Axel Honneth in his great work Freedoms Right.1 This is through interpreting Rousseau’s calls for the moral freedom to be governed only through the laws which one imposes on ones’ self as a complementary extension of the liberal outlook. In addition to negative and positive liberty/freedom we must talk about social freedom as exceptionally important, along with a set of rights not to be governed by laws and institutions over which we have no or unequal control. This Honnethian spin on Rousseauean
12 Jean Jacques Rousseau. The Social Contract. (London, UK: Penguin Books, 1968).
13 Axel Honneth. Freedom’s Right: the Social Foundations of Democratic Life, trans. Joseph Ganahl. (New York, NY: Columbia University Press, 2016).
                                      - 74 -
themes is important to my own outlook and so I shall return to it at length later on.
What I think we can take away from this esoteric reasoning is that Rousseau was a strange critic of liberalism and bourgeois society. While often associated with the left end of the political spectrum, and remaining an object of ire and scorn from critics on the right,14 the history is more complicated than that. A variety of conservative and reactionary commentators, from the late Hegel to Schmitt, found inspiration in Rousseau’s critique of modernity, his emphasis on the need for totalizing uniformity, and his distaste for the vulgarity of pure libertinism. In a sense Rousseau, like Sohrab Ahmari and Francis Fukuyama today, was consistent mostly in being a critic of liberalism from whichever angle seemed plausible. Like Green Day he saw himself as a man who walked alone in a corrupt society beset by decadence and indifference to our brothers and sisters. Rousseau was willing to experiment with a variety of medicines to cure the disease. This contributed to the enormous and wide-ranging influence of his work, but also means it is extremely difficult to get a grip on its protean materials. Few such problems exist for the next critic of liberalism we will examine.
Like Rousseau, Edmund Burke occupies a strange place as a critic of liberalism and liberal rights. A (nuanced) supporter of the American Revolution and a lifelong Whig, not to mention a critic of British imperialism in India,15 Burke was an engaged and public-spirited commentator who in many respects embodied the liberal ideal. He was well read and, despite an aversion to abstraction, capable of mulling first principles when needed. But, aside from Burke’s extended Philosophical Inquiry in the Sublime and Beautiful6 most of his interventions were on concrete issues; a testament to both his personality and a long career in parliamentary politics. And it is in his commentary on such issues that a Burkean
14 Even Jordan Peterson takes a shot at him in his erstwhile book on self-help and psychology. See Jordan Peterson. 12 Rules to Life: An Antidote to Chaos. (Toronto, ON: Random House Canada, 2018).
15 Uday Mehta. Liberalism and Empire: A Study in Nineteenth Century British Liberal Thought. (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1999).
16 Edmund Burke. A Philosophical Enquiry in the Sublime and Beautiful. (London, UK: Penguin Books, 1998).                                      - 75 -critique of unadulterated liberalism comes to the fore; a critique which would continue to split conservatives between those who supported ordered liberty and those who felt it needed to be sharply or totally tempered by tradition and a degree of respect for authority.17
The locus of this critique can be found in Burke’s analysis of natural rights doctrines; very much in vogue in English circles at the time and a reference point for the American revolutionaries. Locke believed natural rights to freedom and property preexisted their establishment in custom or law. Burke had a different approach. As Russell Kirk put it, Burke believed that natural rights were “human customs conforming to divine intent.”18 While broadly accurate, Kirk overemphasizes the degree to which Burke felt it was possible to discern divine intent in the world; the essay on the sublime makes clear that we can only ever perceive the contours of the eternal dimly and not in itself. Burke’s providentialism is grounded in his prudentialism; we recognize the congruence of divine intent with human custom where society is functioning in a reasonably just and orderly fashion. In such a society it becomes increasingly possible to allow individuals certain liberties—formulated as rights—to pursue their distinct visions of the good life in cooperation with others. Indeed, this was foundational to the establishment of the “little brigades” which are the organic creation of lived and free activity, but which serve the role of maintaining order in society. But Burke had little time for those who demanded too many rights, or hypothesized that liberty was the sole end of society. This was the conceit of Rousseau and other “extreme” theorists, who invented rights which could only inspire the masses to destructive behavior antithetical to their real interests.
The pretended rights of these theorists are all extremes: and in proportion
as they are metaphysically true, they are morally and politically false. The
rights of men are in a sort of middle, incapable of definition, but not
17 A very good example is the debate between the liberal Frank Meyer and the Burkean conservative Russell Kirk. See Frank S. Meyer In Defense of Freedom and Related Essays: With A Foreword by William C. Dennis. (Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Fund, 1996).
18 See Russell Kirk. “Edmund Burke and Natural Rights.” The Imaginative Conservative, April 21st 2012. https://theimaginativeconservative.org/2012/04/russell-kirk-edmund-burke-and-natural-rights.html.
                                      - 76 -
impossible to be discerned. The rights of men in government are their advantages; and these are often in balances between differences of good; in compromises between good and evil, and sometimes between evil and
evil Men have no right to what is not reasonable, and to what is not for
their benefit 19
Now it may be asked how, if proper rights are “incapable of definition” but occupy some vague quasi-Aristotelian mean between the extremes of libertinism and authoritarianism, how does Burke know what the right balance is? Providence can supply some answers, but Burke’s explicit rejection of the idea that we can know the divine in and of itself prob-lematizes such an appeal. We at best can know the will of God through looking at the world. The answer to all such questions is we know the correct balance through historical experience, or historical empiricism as it is now called.20 We determine what works not through abstract a priori reasoning, but rather through looking at the history of societies which are doing well and reflecting on how the accumulated wisdom of centuries is reflected in their traditions and laws. In some circumstances, such as the American context, we might say that citizens are ready for more liberty. In other contexts, it becomes clear that a people are neither ready for freedom, or at least for the degree of freedom being demanded by over-zealous reformers and revolutionaries looking for a head to chop. They might spare everyone a lot of trouble by liquidating themselves first.
This can seem eminently practical until you move the issues up a notch and point out that history is hardly self-interpreting. Indeed, it is difficult to think of any other discipline which provokes such widespread disagreement. While an American Burkean might look upon the history of his country with warm and forgiving eyes, an African American critical race theorist might have a far less hagiographic interpretation. As Ian Shapiro points out when discussing the Burkean outlook, one person’s
19 Edmund Burke. Reflections on the Revolution in France. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2009).
20 See Yoram Hazony. “Conservative Democracy.” First Things, January 2019. https://www.firstth-ings.com/article/2019/01/conservative-democracy.                                      - 77 -long and proud tradition is another’s hegemonic ideology.21 Burke of course would reject such an approach, which veers close to standpoint epistemology. He would instead stress that a good historical empiricist knows from experience when it is advisable to grant a people greater freedom and rights, and when doing so risks chaos and disorder. But that is plenty mysterious; many reactionary atrocities—from the perpetuation of slavery in the antebellum American south to the acceptance of Nazism by conservative German industrialists—were justified by appealing to moderation and the need to preserve order. This is why Burkeanism is fundamentally an outlook or attitude in the final instance. The Burkean knows when and which rights are to be granted at which time for affective reasons. These affective reasons can be labelled in many different fashions: the opinions of the man on the Clapham omnibus, common sense, or as Burke unambiguously put it, the “prejudices” of the population. But they all symbolize a willingness to say “this far, but no further” whenever liberals or egalitarians make demands for the further extension of rights down the social hierarchy.
As an outlook, Burke’s critique of rights is rather difficult to pin down. Burkeans criticize rights when conservatives have strong affective reactions to the prospect of extending rights to certain groups or are hostile to the formulation of new rights they feel are dangerous or excessive. This generates a tendency to provide retrospective historical arguments designed to apologize for or vindicate the status quo. These arguments will persist until one of two things happens. Either the progressive demand for extending rights to different groups or formulating new rights is defeated, at least for a time. This is of course what happened during the Age of Metternich, throughout southern reconstruction, during the Reagan and Thatcher revolutions, and in Trumpist America and Modhi’s India. Or progressives will win sufficient victories, legal, political and/or intellectual, that attitudes change and the prejudice or common-sense view of the masses shifts. In those circumstances Burkean conservatives will eventually abandon such fights, and soon enough may even start militantly defending the new status quo. The conservative shift on
21 Ian Shapiro. “The Burkean Outlook.” Yale Courses, April 6th 2011. https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=hkDqadw-fJE&list=PL2FD48CE33DFBEA7E&index=19.
                                      - 78 -
LGBTQ issues in recent years is a prominent example. When this might occur can never be accurately determined using theory since it is closer to a gut feeling Burkeans have that the rights granted will not substantially disrupt their enjoyment of ordered liberty.
The most serious objection to this approach moves downwards from this theoretical ambiguity. As Corey Robin points out22 there is an important sense in which the outlook of Burkeans is often a reaction to any efforts to break up beloved hierarchies which have served to concentrate power and privilege in the hands of the few at the expense of the many. Burke himself was more admirable than many of his progeny on this point; given his willingness to accept British sins against both the American and Indian subject peoples and to rightly rebuke the French revolutionaries for their violence and terror. His progeny, such as Russell Kirk, were far more willing to look the other way when those they admired committed grave crimes against millions of their human fellows. Consequently, they are also far less willing to make determined efforts to eliminate injustices which are the consequence of these storied legacies. The tendency of Burkeans to see the past through rose colored glasses is matched only by their fear of the present. They conceive of time as a glorious history of prior events, which falls out of joint when the tensions and conflicts of the past can no longer be painted over but cascade into demands for serious change to bring about a more just future. Liberalism, as a progressive doctrine in the Millsian sense, can therefore come across as very threatening. Though not nearly so much as the next figure we will look at, who examined history with very different eyes than Burke’s.
The Marxist Critique: From "On the Jewish Question" to Slavoj Zizek
Few progressive critiques of liberal rights have been as influential and long lived as the Marxist analysis. The most well-known formulation of Marx’s criticisms come in the early essay “On the Jewish Question”
22 Corey Robin. The Reactionary Mind Second Edition: Conservatism from Edmund Burke to Donald Trump. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2018).                                      - 79 -published in 1844 and responding to the Young Hegelian Bruno Bauer. As with so many of his non-Engelsian relations, Bauer was initially a friend of Marx’s who soured on the cantankerous Prussian in 1841 over political questions. Bauer presented himself as a proponent of the liberal secular state, though his “liberalism” on this point more closely resembled the militant secularism of French republicanism than Lockean religious toleration. He called on the Jews of Prussia to renounce their religious beliefs, which held them back from full inclusion in a secularizing Germany, and become equal citizens entitled to the same rights as any other. This would lead to their “political emancipation” in conjunction with all others.
Marx disputed this point along two prongs, though only the second is especially relevant to us here. Firstly, he made the point that Bauer was overestimating the extent to which a nineteenth century liberal state necessitated or would produce private secularism through the dissolution of religious attachments. For instance, Marx points out that liberal societies such as the United States remain deeply religious.23 Marx goes on to point out that the secularism put forward by liberals like Bauer is compromised by the need for an intermediary—in this case the state—which assumes the form of a quasi-divine entity. In this case Marx is making the Feurbachian point that human limitations under the alienated conditions of modernity will always necessitate the projection of strength onto a sublimated object; in this case the powerful liberal state which serves as the locus of our ideological commitments. Therefore, little can be accomplished by simply demanding political emancipation for Jews or other religious minorities that secularize and become good bourgeois citizens. Either that will not occur and religion will persist despite the state itself secularizing, or the state itself will emerge as a sublimated substitute for religion, since the forms of alienation most pressing within modern societies haven’t been dissolved yet. These forms are to be found primarily in material rather than political life, and it is here that Marx locates the limitations of liberal rights.
23 Karl Marx. “On the Jewish Question” in Early Writings, trans. Rodney Livingstone. (London, UK: Penguin Classics, 1992).
                                      - 80 -
Marx sarcastically mocks the socio-political distinctions of liberalism in his opening salvo against liberal rights. The perfect political life is a “heavenly” life very divorced from the “earthly” existence most of us endure. As political beings, individuals possess liberal rights to political participation, freedom, and of course property; albeit often highly circumscribed by restrictions on individuals from the lower classes. Marx does not deny that this is an improvement on the old Feudal era, claiming that “political emancipation is a big step forward.” With the end of Feudalism came the break-up of society into independent individuals whose relation to one another depended on law; what Marx calls egoistic man. Unlike his later analysis in Capital, Marx occasionally makes a rather essentialist argument that the problem with a society pivoting around egoistic man is the perversion of the “true man” who comes to exist only as the “abstract citizen.” This warps our deeper nature through the reduction of a more complex individual to the egoist.
The “rights of man” appears as “natural rights,” because conscious activity is concentrated on the political act. Egoistic man is the passive result of the dissolved society, a result that is simply found in existence, an object of immediate certainty, therefore a natural object. The political revolution resolves civil life into its component parts, without revolutionizing these components themselves or subjecting them to criticism. It regards civil society, the world of needs, labor, private interests, civil law, as the basis of its existence, as a precondition not requiring further substantiation and therefore as its natural basis. Finally, man as a member of civil society is held to be man in the proper sense, homme as distinct from citoyen, because he is man in his sensuous, individual, immediate existence, whereas political man is only abstract, artificial man, man as an allegorical, juridical person. The real man is recognized only in the shape of the egoistic individual, the true man is recognized only in the shape of the abstract citizen.24
Marx goes on to make some highly anti-Semitic25 remarks about how the economic conditions of liberal capitalism enables the spread of Jewish
24 Karl Marx. Early Writings, trans. Rodney Livingstone. (London, UK: Penguin Classics, 1992) at pg 220.
25 Marx himself was of Jewish background initially, but seems to have little interest in avoiding stereotypes and insults which are stale and stupid.                                      - 81 -money-making tendencies within nominally Christian communities. Most of these comments are largely foolish and unworthy, though there are scattered remarks of great interest. In particular, Marx comments on how the alienation of modern society assumes the same kind of fantastic qualities as religion of yore; the projection of fantastical qualities onto objects we ourselves have created. The most obvious of these is money. This of course anticipates Marx’s analysis of commodity fetishism in Capital: Volume One.26
The analysis of liberal rights in “On the Jewish Question” is an important starting point for the Marxist critique for two reasons. The first is Marx’s criticisms of liberal rights as reflecting and engendering the creation of egoistic—Marcuse might say “one dimensional”27 -human beings as a consequence of their relations in public being purely mediated through law while their material relations remain privatized despite their importance. This becomes problematic for other reasons as well, which Marx outlines in his Contribution to a Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right. One notable example is the way modern law assumes a positivist form which readily becomes naturalized; individuals come to assume that the legal system which defines their political relations possess a necessary existence which cannot be seriously questioned. I shall take up this question more thoroughly in Chap. 5.
The second of Marx’s criticisms is of liberalism’s seemingly artificial distinctions between the political realm and civil society, or as we might put it, between the public and the private spheres. These distinctions are not simply analytical, since in practice they entrench and exacerbate the alienated contradictions present within liberal capitalist society. This latter criticism will become especially important for generations of critical theorists and activists; particularly feminist critics who also insisted that the division between public and private served to entrench patriarchal authority.
What then are we to make of the young Marx’s comments? There is a fair bit that rings true in his early analysis; particularly its efforts to
26 Karl Marx. Capital Volume One: A Critique of Political Economy, trans. Ernest Mandel (London, UK: Penguin Books, 1990) Chap. 1, Sect. 4.
27 Herbert Marcuse. One Dimensional Man. (Boston, MA: Beacon Press, 1964).
                                      - 82 -
unmask the naturalization of liberal life under the pretentious auspices of the “universal rights of man” which exist naturally and everywhere without controversy. Marx is also acutely aware that the conceptual distinctions on which much liberal theory is predicated express real problems emerging within society which cannot simply be thought through and synthesized in theory. Instead they will be the subject of tensions and potentially radical action. But the essay has a sketchy quality to it, bubbling with ideas and arguments that are not yet fully formed in the way they might have been later.
I say “might have been” since, as David Harvey notes in The Limits to Capital, Marx never worked out a very satisfying account of the liberal capitalist state.28 Consequently he has little to say about the nature of liberal rights in his mature period. The classic exposition is in the preface to the Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, where Marx makes his problematic distinction between the economic base and the legal-political superstructure, implying that the relations established in the former are ultimately determinative of the latter. Marx admitted that while he studied law—and by extension legal rights—for years, he felt it was of less interest than “philosophy and history.” He then moved on to seeing economics, and more particularly economic relations, as increasingly important. He felt that legal relations concerning rights, for instance to property, merely express the reality of class power within existing relations of production. As Marx put it in his famous summation:
My inquiry led me to the conclusion that neither legal relations nor political forms could be comprehended whether by themselves or on the basis of a so-called general development of the human mind, but that on the contrary they originate in the material conditions of life... In the social production of their existence, men inevitably enter into definite relations, which are independent of their will, namely relations of production appropriate to a given stage in the development of their material forces of production. The totality of these relations of production constitutes the economic structure of society, the real foundation, on which arises a legal and political superstructure and to which correspond definite forms of
28 David Harvey. The Limits to Capital: New and Fully Updated Edition. (London, UK: Verso Books, 2006).                                      - 83 -social consciousness. The mode of production of material life conditions the general process of social, political and intellectual life. It is not the consciousness of men that determines their existence, but their social existence that determines their consciousness. At a certain stage of development, the material productive forces of society come into conflict with the existing relations of production or—this merely expresses the same thing in legal terms—with the property relations within the framework of which they have operated hitherto.29
This is an undoubtedly rich and endlessly suggestive summary. It also admirably draws attention to the influence of economic relations on law and politics. But it is also highly simplistic; suggesting a uni-causal model of how law generally and liberal law specifically operates. It also ignores the independent influence of legality and politics on the economy, while dismissing as philosophical idealism an excessive concern with culture, religion and other factors. This criticism of Marx is not at all original; plenty of critical legal scholars since the 1980s have pointed out that Marxism’s oikophilia can distract from other forces which marginalize individuals on the basis of gender, race, sexual orientation and so on.30 To be fair, Marx himself seemed implicitly aware of this limitation. In the Grundrisse, his dialectical methodology towards social phenomena becomes considerably more refined, and by the time of Capital he tends to approach liberal capitalism as a totality characterized by mutually overdetermined processes31 which produce antagonistic contradictions. But this doesn’t compensate for the lack of theoretical clarity on these matters, which is probably why so many vulgar Marxists lean heavily on the crude base-superstructure model to criticize liberal law and rights. Indeed, even more sophisticated commentators such as Althusser felt compelled
29 Karl Marx. Early Writings, trans. Rodney Livingstone. (London, UK: Penguin Classics, 1992) at pgs 424—425.
30 Even sympathetic commentators have made this point. See Catharine MacKinnon. Towards a Feminist Theory of the State. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1989).
31 The reference to processes is technical. David Harvey did a great deal to showcase the alignment of Marxist dialectics with process ontology in his more philosophical works. See David Harvey. Justice, Nature, and the Geography of Difference. (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 1996).
                                      - 84 -
to insist that, complications aside, the effective specificity of the economy was determinative of everything else—if only in “the last instance.”32 Of course, many Marxist critics of rights have been highly aware of this difficulty, and have sought to compensate for it by developing more thorough accounts of law and liberal rights. By far the most convincing accounts were derived by the early critical legal theorists who focused on the way that property rights insulated the powers that be from effective democratic and redistributive efforts, while also showcasing the myriad ways that systems of law tend to be skewed to supporting those with significant economic resources. Duncan Kennedy33 and Michael Mandel34 are both pioneers on this front. Their basic argument is that liberal law reflects abstract ideals which protect and advance the interest of some economic groups at the expense of others. This is in part how liberal legalism conceives of the subjects of law as atomistic individuals who are organized by a set of morally neutral rules applied impartially by judicial officials. As Kennedy puts it:
The individualist theory of the judicial role follows directly from these premises. In its pure form, that theory makes the judge a simple rule applier, and rules are defined as directives whose predicates are always facts and never values. So long as the judge refers only to facts in deciding “the question of liability, and the remedial consequences, he is in the realm of the objective. Since facts are objective rather than subjective, they can be determined, and one can assert that the judge is right or wrong in what he does. The result is both the certainty necessary for private maximization and the exclusion of arbitrary use of state power to further some ends (values) at the expense of others.35
Liberal rights discourse plays a role in this process as well. In his paper “The Critique of Rights in Critical Legal Studies” Kennedy makes the
32 Louis Althusser. Reading Capital. (London, UK: Verso Books, 1997).
33 See especially Duncan Kennedy. “Form and Substance in Private Law Adjudication.” Harvard Law Review, Vol 89, 1976.
34 Michael Mandel. The Charter of Rights and the Legalization of Politics in Canada. (Toronto, ON: Thompson Educational Publishing, 1994).
35 Duncan Kennedy. “Form and Substance in Private Law Adjudication.” Harvard Law Review, Vol 89, 1976 at pg 1770.                                      - 85 -point that rights were postulated by liberals as securing the moral and legal equality of all. But equality only in “a special sense.”36 Even the various movements which through the twentieth century sought to extend liberal rights to previously marginalized groups—as I discussed in Chap. 1— insisted that equality of rights “did not involve the demand for equality in the distribution of income or wealth between social classes, regions, or communities, but rather ‘equal protection’ for individual members of previously subordinated social groups.”37 This ‘equal’ protection of rights was of course of unequal value to different individuals once one looked passed the formalism of liberal legalism.
There are a number of reasons for this skepticism. Firstly, the conception of judicial officials as mere neutral arbiters of the law masked their role as defenders of the ruling classes. This is in part because once one looks past the rule formalism and to the actual substance of the law one can see the myriad ways in which a given legal system operates to entrench, for instance, a conception of property rights which is antithetical to redistributive efforts. Judges who claim to be merely neutrally applying the rules fail to recognize that the substance of law is not itself neutral on such issues. Their activities reinforce and affirm the established order of political economy, whatever its economic injustice.
Secondly, since judicial officials -especially Judges—tend to come from similar class38 backgrounds they either fail to recognize or are indifferent to their role in upholding such an established order. Their outlook and sympathies are invariably shaped by their class situatedness. This means that, say, unions and labor officials who wanted to use the law to advance
36 Duncan Kennedy. “The Critique of Rights in Critical Legal Studies” in Janet Halley and Wendy Brown. Left Legalism/Left Critique. (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2002) pg 182.
37 Duncan Kennedy. “The Critique of Rights in Critical Legal Studies” in Janet Halley and Wendy Brown. Left Legalism/Left Critique. (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2002) pg 182.
38 The presumption inherent in this argument is that belonging to a given class typically shapes one’s political beliefs. There is no doubt some truth to this claim, but it does not hold ubiquitously. One may come from a position of affluence—as Marx himself did—and none the less embrace progressive and even radical politics. The same is true of Judges. On the other hand, coming from a marginalized and poor background is no guarantee of adopting a progressive politics or approach to the law. This is the point of Corey Robin’s book on Clarence Thomas. As Robin tells it, Thomas grew up a black orphan in a blue-collar middle-class family in the American south, yet he became of the most conservative Judges on the Supreme Court of the United States. See Robin, Corey. The Enigma of Clarence Thomas. (New York, NY: Metropolitan Books, 2019).
                                      - 86 -
progressive causes are unlikely to find a sympathetic audience in judicial officials.39
Thirdly the legal system is, as is so well known it warrants jokes about scheming lawyers like Lionel Hutz in The Simpsons, prohibitively expensive to access. This not only means that the wealthy benefit a great deal more from its existence, but also that working-class individuals can come to view their rights as hollow and the notion of legal impartiality as a sham.40
Fourthly, an emphasis on agitating for rights through the legal system can contribute to the depoliticization of what are fundamentally political issues. Rather than taking democratic steps to agitate for structural change, workers and the exploited may be tempted to pursue Sisyphean rights claims in the legal system. But because of the myriad reasons highlighted above, they are unlikely to be successful. The consequence will be a loss of resources and energy which would have been better expended in political agitation.41 This brings us to the question of why, if liberal legalism and liberal rights are of so little concrete value, many individuals still put a great deal of stock in them. Slavoj Zizek attempted to provide a Marxist inspired answer to this question which builds on the dialectical account in “On the Jewish Question” more obviously than the accounts discussed above. In his paper “Against Human Rights,” Zizek claims that human rights in liberal capitalist societies rest on three assumptions. The first is that appeals to rights serve to counter fundamentalist and naturalistic claims about reality and morality. The second is that the most basic rights are to freedom of choice, which really means a right to dedicate one’s self to a life of pleasure. And the third assumption is that rights serve to check the exercise of power in liberal capitalist societies.42 In true Marxist fashion, Zizek is keen to show how each of these assumptions is not only false, but reflective of an ideological standpoint. This is in part
39 Allan Hutchinson. Waitingfor C.O.RA.F. (Toronto, ON: University of Toronto Press, 1995).
40 See Sally Engle Merry. Getting Justice and Getting Even: Legal Consciousness Among Working-Class Americans. (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1990) for a robust analysis of the attitudes this may engender.
41 See Michael Mandel. The Charter of Rights and the Legalization of Politics in Canada. (Toronto, ON: Thompson Educational Publishing, 1994).
42 See Slavoj Zizek. “Against Human Rights.” New Left , Vol 34, 2005.                                      - 87 -because liberal rights are precisely intended to naturalize and depoliticize the mode of life one finds in late capitalism. Rights are to be the only locus for agitating for transformative change, despite the interpellation of rights bearing subjects in a legal system which is designed to resist alteration. This means that we should reject them as an “obscene” feature where individuals associate with their rights as a simulacrum of freedom, while really being transformed into subjects who speak for the universality of their highly particular communities and its contingent capitalist power structures. As Zizek puts it in his paper “The Obscenity of Human Rights:”
Beyond with regard to the contingent sphere of political struggles, as universal “natural rights of man” exempted from history, they also should not be dismissed as a reified fetish which is a product of concrete historical processes of the politicization of citizens. The gap between the universality of Human Rights and the political rights of citizens is thus not a gap between the universality of man and a specific political sphere; it, rather, “separates the whole of the community from itself,” as Ranciere put it in a precise Hegelian way. Far from being pre-political, “universal Human Rights” designate the precise space of politicization proper: what they amount to is the right to universality as such, the right of a political agent to assert its radical non-coincidence with itself (in its particular identity), i.e., to posit itself—precisely insofar as it is the “surnumerary” one, the “part with no part,” the one without a proper place in the social edifice—as an agent of universality of the Social as such. The paradox is thus a very precise one, and symmetrical to the paradox of universal human rights as the rights of those reduced to inhumanity: at the very moment when we try to conceive political rights of citizens without the reference to universal “meta-political” Human Rights, we lose politics itself, i.e., we reduce politics to a “post-political” play of negotiation of particular interests.—What, then, happens to Human Rights when they are reduced to the rights of homo sacer, of those excluded from the political community, reduced to “bare life”—i.e., when they become of no use, since they are the rights of those who, precisely, have no rights, are treated as inhuman?.43
43 Slavoj Zizek. “The Obscenity of Human Rights: Violence as Symptom.” May 4th, 2006 https:// www.lacan.com/zizviol.htm.
                                      - 88 -
These modern-day Marxist critiques are very powerful, and I will return to them later in defending my own progressive interpretation of rights starting in Chap. 4. For now, I will merely say that the argument that to the extent rights enable self-authorship through the establishment of real equality, this critique loses much of its force. For now, I wish to take up Zizek’s reference to “mere humanity” as a jumping off point for the next part of my analysis. The reference to mere humanity gestures to the failure of liberal rights to prevent many of the atrocities which took place during the long twentieth century. Such atrocities demanded people ask whether liberal rights were truly worth the paper they were written on, which resulted in some of the darker and more intriguing critiques developed thus far.
The "Right to Have Rights" in the Long Twentieth Century
By the end of the twentieth century, many considered the triumph of liberal democracy to be complete, leading to quasi-Hegelian narratives about history proper coming to an end. It was easy to forget that for many of the prior decades liberalism faced existential threats from both ends of the political spectrum. Ironically, liberalism gained a great deal of its ideological and moral force from the failures of liberal institutional structures to contain political and existential energies which bore tremendously dark fruit in the form of Stalinism and Nazism. The collapse of the provisional state Duma in Russia to the agitation of the Bolsheviks and the legendary failure of the Weimar Republic to contain the evils of Nazism showcased the instability of liberal systems when faced with powerful and persuasive illiberal movements. Rather than proving an enduring lesson, the utter failure of Nazism and Fascism and later Soviet Communism generated a deep quiescence on the part of liberal apologists. The result was, as Margaret Thatcher put it, the fateful and arrogant belief that not only was there no alternative to liberalism, but that even alternate interpretations of liberalism were dated relics before the power of neoliberal ideology and practice. The emergence of post-modern                                      - 89 -conservatism and the resurrection of socialism in the new millennium demonstrate the importance of taking a hard look at this period of history to understand both why liberalism triumphed and where it came exceptionally close to breaking.
As indicated at the end of Chap. 1, the primary contest within liberalism itself was over the extension of rights to previously marginalized groups. This was well captured by Hannah Arendt’s famous claim about the “right to have rights” being the most crucial entitlement to be demanded.44 This was true both internationally, when it came to actually respecting the dignity and value of individuals like refugees fleeing from tyranny, and domestically with regard to granting women, minorities— or majorities in the case of apartheid systems—and finally LGBTQ individuals equal rights before the law. One of the motivations for this extension was the existence of powerful alternatives to liberalism in the form of the authoritarian and totalitarian political systems, which inspired the imagination of all too many people who felt left behind by liberal capitalism.
I have already discussed the Marxist critique of liberalism and liberal rights which gained substantial ground in the twentieth century, largely because there was a systematic alternative present and competing in the form of the Soviet Union. However, Marx’s own position was substantially revised by its assimilation into Leninism and Bolshevism more generally. This history is complex, and since I have already presented what I consider the strongest iterations of the Marxist critique above, I will only outline the main contours of this revision briefly. Needless to say, the Leninist critique lost a great deal of its normative force through association with a brutal totalitarian regime. Its vanguardist willingness to overthrow the provisional Duma and assume control of the country after a brutal civil war prefaced an era where any semblance of rights and democratic organization gave way to single party rule and the paranoia of dictatorship. What is salvageable in the Leninist critique is his reading of liberal capitalism and imperialism, and the efforts to draw substantial links between them. Lenin’s argument in Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism provided a necessary bridge between Marx’s economic and
44 Hannah Arendt. The Origins of Totalitarianism. (New York, NY: Harcout, 1955).
                                      - 90 -
philosophical theorizing and geopolitical analysis. His position is quite dogmatically materialist in its focus on monopolistic forces and finance capital, largely ignoring factors such as racism and culture and the role they played in spurring imperialist efforts. None the less Lenin does gesture vaguely to the ideological justifications for imperialism given by liberal apologists, in addition to the various detractors who criticized it from a non-Marxist perspective.
Bourgeois scholars and publicists usually come out in defence of imperialism in a somewhat veiled form; they obscure its complete, domination and its deep-going roots, strive to push specific and secondary details into the forefront and do their very best to distract attention from essentials by means of absolutely ridiculous schemes for “reform”, such as police supervision of the trusts or banks, etc. Cynical and frank imperialists who are bold enough to admit the absurdity of the idea of reforming the fundamental characteristics of imperialism are a rarer phenomenon.45
These kinds of positions would later become exceptionally influential amongst a variety of post-colonial critics who would draw a through line from the early twentieth century to today and suggest that internationalist efforts to export rights discourse are a form of neo-imperialism.46 They service the ambition of neoliberals who deploy the liberal rights as a weapon to open developing countries to structural adjustment programs to the advantage of capital and the detriment of local democracy and populations.47 Many of these critiques are considerably more nuanced than the Leninist iteration, and make compelling arguments for how rights can be weaponized in the service of hegemonic global power and capital, at the expanse of emancipation for subject peoples and pluralistic modes of life. However, one can follow Gayatri Spivak in recognizing that in the decades since rights discourse have proven more fluid and amenable to reconceptualization and new uses than many critics
45 Vladimir Ilyich Lenin. Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism. Marxists.Org, 2020. https:// www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1916/imp-hsc/ch09.htm.
46 See Nelson Maldonado-Torres. “The Coloniality of Human Rights.” Revista Critica de Sociais, 2017 for a good example.
47 Costas Douzinas’ critique is emblematic here. See Costas Douzinas. The End of Human Rights: Critical Thought at the Turn of the Century. (Portland, OR: Hart Publishing, 2000).                                      - 91 -acknowledge. This could include detaching them from their situatedness in the discourse of Western imperialism and liberal legalism.
Nevertheless, it is still disingenuous to call human rights Eurocentric, not only because, in the global South, the domestic human rights workers are, by and large, the descendants of the colonial subject, often culturally positioned against Eurocentrism, but also because, internationally, the role of the new diasporic is strong, and the diasporic in the metropolis stands for “diversity,” “against Eurocentrism.” Thus the work of righting wrongs is shared above a class line that to some extent and unevenly cuts across race and the North-South divide.48
I shall return to this question later, and so will only say here that this demonstrates that the “right to have rights” can very much be conceived in a variety of fashions. It needn’t be a mere demand for the rights offered by hegemonic imperial powers, or even at the domestic level for the institution of a standard package of liberal rights. The semantic openness of rights discourse combined with their normative power means they are subject to a remarkable array of interpretations which Spivak gestures to in her paper. This is a key advantage which I will come back to. That is because alongside these broadly Leninist critiques are darker ones which emerged from the political far right during the twentieth century. While progressive criticisms largely eschewed rights discourse as either hypocritical, selectively applied, or inadequate to the goals of real emancipation, the reactionary impulse was quite different. It was to show that rights were little more than a sham.
Conservative critiques of rights were nothing new to the twentieth century. As indicated Burke had already laid a lot of the groundwork in the eighteenth century. What made the early twentieth century assaults from the far right distinctive was the vitriol and overall quality of the critiques. Many of these were descended from Nietzsche’s scathing and inegalitarian characterization of rights as a way for the weak to contain the strong, blinded by resentment for the latter’s glory and seeking protection. For Nietzsche there was nothing inherently noble or dignified in
48 Gayatri Spivak. “Righting Wrongs.” The South Atlantic Quarterly, Vol 103, 2004 pg 525.
                                      - 92 -
the “herd” of mankind which warranted such ostentatious protections. And indeed the lie that there could be such protection was readily exposed time and again when the powerful wreaked havoc among the citizenry despite the many cries of “respect my rights!”, including in 2020 when a US President authorized force against peaceful protesters to stage a photoop. Power so exercised was of far greater significance than morality in the role it played in people’s lives. 'ttis was a theme which would be taken up by Carl Schmitt, the greatest right-wing critic of liberalism and liberal rights to ever emerge.
Schmitt is a complex figure. An undeniably evil man who supported a monstrously wicked regime, he writes so candidly and seductively the reader feels compelled to accept the gravity of his insights. Born and raised a Roman Catholic, Schmitt later abandoned his faith but never ceased expressing a sharp and vindictive distaste for liberalism and its many hypocrisies similar to what one finds in far right Catholic discourse. That distaste was expressed in a series of remarkable books, many very short, which state his case polemically and with the force which only comes from genuine style. This does not mean he is correct of course, but it does make his arguments all the harder to dismiss since one cannot retreat into tirades about obfuscation and an unwillingness to follow a principle where it leads. Even if it leads into darkness.
Carl Schmitt was born in Germany in 1888 to a petit bourgeois family of Roman Catholics. While Schmitt himself later repudiated his Catholicism the conception of human beings as sinful and fallen creatures never dissipated, nor did his tendency to elevate politics to theological levels.49 He volunteered for the German Army during the First World War before teaching at various Universities during the Weimar period. This was a time of immense political upheaval in the young German democracy, and Schmitt was exposed to the real possibility that liberalism would be defeated and destroyed by either its Marxist-Socialist or fascist competitors. Not coincidentally, this was a time when the young Schmitt—still in his 30s—wrote his greatest and most polemical works:
49 John Keane argues along these lines and I largely agree with him. See John Keane. “Carl Schmitt’s Concept of the Political” Lecture Delivered at Peking University May 28th 2018. https://www. youtube.com/watch?v=gEyFKWZFq2U.                                      - 93 -including Political Geology in 1922 and the article The Concept of the Political in 1927 followed by a book of the same name in 1932. Of course, the Nazis did succeed in overthrowing liberalism in Germany: a fact which, depending on who you listen to, Schmitt either welcomed or at least rapidly came to terms with. He swiftly joined the new regime, becoming known as the “Crown Jurist” of the Third Reich before he was ingloriously fired in 1936 for not being anti-Semitic enough. That’s not to say Schmitt didn’t give it the old college try, as his virulent comments on Judaism in 1938’s The Leviathan in the State Theory of Thomas Hobbes proved.50 After the Second World War he refused to apologize, and continued to produce works critical of the emerging liberal international order. He died in 1985 at the age of 96, shortly before the end of the Cold War. For a commentator who witnessed almost the entirety of the dark twentieth century, one wonders what he might have thought of the triumphalism which marked the post 89’ period.
Schmitt’s fundamental outlook is well expressed in Political Geology, where he declares that “all significant concepts of the modern theory of the state are secularized theological concepts.” His premiere reference point for this is, of course, Hobbes’ Leviathan, the mortal God who is to take the place of the immortal deity we can never truly know. This point, however, is not just exegetical. Schmitt is here making a subtle critique of liberalism, arguing its secularist ambitions were always to try and evade the existential choices required by political theology through mediation by parliamentary conversation and economic growth. Its goal in this was to also transcend the conflicts associated with theology, which raised issues could never be settled through an appeal to the “facts.” Schmitt cuts through such vanity and insists that politics is always an existential contest of collective self-definition; in the words of Paul Tillich, politics is a struggle over what is of “ultimate concern.”51 To a certain extent we always have a choice about which principles to commit ourselves to, which cannot be settled through appeal to forms of rationalization. This might appear a recipe for chaos and disorder, which Schmitt is well aware
50 Carl Schmitt. The Leviathan in the State Theory of Thomas Hobbes. (Chicago, IL. The University of Chicago Press, 2008).
51 Paul Tillich. The Dynamics of Faith. (New York, NY: HarperCollins, 2009).
                                      - 94 -
of. But the danger is ultimately moderated by the fact that, for the mass of beings, sovereign power will settle the existential question of our collective political theology. It will do this through defining who belongs and who does not, based on the selection of political theologies.
This is where Schmitt’s famous work on the concept of the political comes in. In the book of the same title Schmitt insists that any concept of politics as a practice presupposes a concept of the political based on a foundational distinction between friend and enemy. It is foundational because Schmitt has no faith that mere talk, so valued by vulgar liberals, can actually resolve our theological differences. Political friends must therefore align to prepare for conflict with their enemies, the ultimate expression of which is war. Should a given group amass sufficient power to establish a sovereign political community, it becomes capable of enacting a regular legal order which effectively neutralizes real politics domestically. As Schmitt puts it:
Every general norm demands a normal, everyday frame of life to which it can be properly applied and which is subjected to its regulations. The norm requires a homogeneous medium. The effective normal situation is not a mere ‘superficial presupposition’ that a jurist must ignore, that situation belongs precisely to its immanent validity. There exists no norm that is applicable to chaos. For a legal order to make sense, a normal situation must exist, and he is sovereign who definitely decides whether this normal situation actually exists.52
There also persists the possibility that instability will start to upend the domestic legal order, as of course it did in Weimar Germany. In that case Schmitt claims that sovereign power can “decide the exception” by suspending the normal legal order and taking whatever actions it needs to in order to defeat potential enemies. Drawing from Kierkegaard’s famous injunction that the exception in effect determines the existential dimensions of the norm, Schmitt argues that the exception is a “miracle” of sorts. The normal legal order is suspended through intervention by the very power that stabilizes it, in order to wipe out those who might pose a
52 Carl Schmitt. The Concept of the Political (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1996) at pg 46.                                      - 95 -threat to the homogeneity of the political community; much as God destroyed Jericho at the behest of the Israelite army.
'ttis means of course that Schmitt has little respect for liberal rights.53 From a juridical standpoint, Schmitt interprets liberal rights as protections against sovereign power which either pre-exist the political community in the case of Locke or come into existence as a foundation of law for figures like Kant and Mill. To Schmitt this is nonsensical since it implies that sovereign power would willingly subject itself to constraints formulated as abstract natural rights or, worse, which came into existence with power through some hypothetical contractarian process of legitimation. Schmitt argued that, when push came to shove, liberal rights were very much fungible and readily sacrificed in instances where the political community and its theology faced an existential threat. As just another political theology—albeit an especially vulgar one—liberalism could paradoxically be put into contexts where it would be required to abandon its commitment to rights for the sake of protecting itself.54 This meant that liberalism was no better than any other political theology despite its pretentious and hypocritical protestations to the contrary. Indeed, the only time when liberalism could be consistent in a crisis was by allowing itself to fall by refusing to clamp down on internal “enemies” who used the rights granted to them to agitate for overthrowing the system.55
Schmitt concluded that this expose showed that the ideal of liberal democracy was a sham, both during periods of normalcy and when invoking the exception. Schmitt follows Aristotle and Rousseau in arguing that democracy is axiomatically committed to the fundamental equality of all individuals, who must ultimately give laws to themselves. The
53 My reading here is very inspired by David Dyzenhaus’. See David Dyzenhaus. “Liberalism After the Fall: Schmitt, Rawls, and the Problem of Justification” Philosophy and Social Criticism, Vol 22, 1996.
54 Some contemporary theorists argue that, particularly through the War on Terror or when faced with migration and refugee “crises” liberal societies have done just this. They draw on Schmittian critiques of liberalism, though ironically since their ambition is to argue to a more inclusive political community. For a paradigmatic example see the work of Giorgio Agamben. Giorgio Agamben. Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life, trans. Daniel Heller-Roazen. (Stanford, California: Stanford University Press, 1998) Giorgio Agamben. State of Exception, trans. Kevin Attell. (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2005).
55 Karl Popper referred to this as a the “paradox of toleration.” See Karl Popper.	e Open Society and Its Enemies: One Volume Edition. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2013).
                                      - 96 -
purest form of democracy, according to Schmitt, is as Rousseau described it; one where the will of the volk is fundamentally united and homogenous.56 Strangely, this means that democracy is not incompatible with the principle of a leader, whether the Duce or the Fuhrer. A leader who truly embodied the general will of the political community would be fundamentally a democratic figure. By contrast liberalism can never be about allowing the people to express their wishes, since individuals possess fundamental rights against the general will. Liberalism is committed to a small, anti-democratic state which upholds private property and insulates the interests of the some against the demos. By contrast a powerful leader speaking for the general will would never allow something as paltry as a set of rights scribbled on scraps of paper get in the way of their glorious existential mission. Liberalism also insists on its universality, attempting to establish as new “nomos” across the earth.57 By contrast dictatorial democracy is exclusive; all are equal who belong, but none have any say if they are excluded.58 All animals are equal, but most are not even worthy of being called animals.
Schmitt’s critiques of liberalism are more emblematic of the long twentieth century than Lenin’s for this reason. While Soviet communism wound up in hellish totalitarianism, it never abandoned a hypocritical utopianism in its aspirations to bring all the world under heel. By contrast Schmitt’s fascism—I will no longer dignify it by calling it democ-racy—is deliberately and proudly exclusionary. The world is divided into the weak and the powerful, and the latter will always feast on the former. Political communities unite us with our friends and can provide a sense of normalcy, but only through the radical ostracization of all others as enemies in potentia or de facto. They should possess no rights or privileges, but only be kept out if they are foreigners or liquidated if enemies. The bitter truth of all this is it does resemble nothing so much as the Miltonian injunction that it is better to reign in hell than rule in heaven.
56 See Carl Schmitt. Constitutional Theory, trans. Jeffrey Seitzer. (Durham, NC. Duke University Press, 2008).
57 Carl Schmitt. The Nomos of the Earth in the International Law of Jus Publicum Europeaum. (Candor, NY: Telos Press, 2006).
58 This helps to explain why many post-modern conservatives invoke populist rhetoric to exclude migrants, refugees and others who are not wanted by their supporters.                                      - 97 -If the world needs to be reduced to a state of eternal war in order to ensure sovereign power is located in those who think and believe as I do, then so be it. Such a demonic philosophy has a Luciferian appeal to it. It is paradoxically built on a vision of reality as a place of chaos which requires absolute power to bring order to a species ultimately not worth much. Schmitt’s theory deserves its place in the sewage of history.
Liberal Rights and the Critical Legal Tradition
I have already discussed the Marxist influence on critical legal studies, in particular its critique of liberalism and liberal rights, in some depth earlier. Rather than rehash this summary I am instead going to highlight some of the non-Marxist elements of critical legal studies and its approach to liberalism. These were best expressed in the work of figures like Roberto Unger and Pierre Schlag, who came up with innovative criticisms not directly beholden to Marxism even if they were undoubtedly inspired by it. The section will conclude with a discussion of how these kinds of total critiques gradually gave way to more partial forms of argumentation, giving rise to the explosion of critical traditions speaking from or for a particular marginalized group.
The roots of critical legal studies lie in American legal realism, the philosophical perspective of a group of judges and scholars who took serious issue with formalistic approaches to the law such as legal positivism. Drawing on pragmatic theories of language and epistemology and recent developments in psychology, legal realists argued that the idea that law could ever be a strictly logical, rule-governed enterprise had no foundation in fact or human history. While Judges and other officials did indeed try to apply legal rules in a relatively consistent manner, the claim that they did so in an impartial and disinterested manner belied the evidence of a significant dose of human subjectivity embedded in the laws very foundations, and in the practice of lawyers and judges. Jerome Frank59 and Oliver Wendell Holmes readily admitted that their judgements were
59 See Jerome Frank. Law and the Modern Mind. (Piscataway, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2009).
                                      - 98 -
very much guided by history, personal inclination, and normative views about what would make things go best.
These somewhat sketchy claims later mutated into a more radical position: the indeterminacy thesis.60 This was the claim that in many instances the language of legal rules was not sufficiently determinate and clear to be applied in an uncontroversial or syllogistic manner to empirical phenomena. Moreover, the attacks on positivistic theories of language by figures like Wittgenstein61 made it clear that the problem went far deeper than just a few poorly drafted and unclear legal rules. This semantic indeterminacy was an inherent element of linguistic interpretation in all human endeavors, including the law. But this raised a serious question of what judges were doing if they weren’t applying the rules in an impartial manner. The answer given by legal realists—and even some legal positivists such as H.L.A Hart62—was that since legal rules were not clear and could never be self-interpreting, it fell to judges to fill in legal gaps through applying their own moral and political judgements. If language was indeterminate so too was the law; though how far one could extend this position was a matter of substantial dispute.63
The critical legal theorists picked up on many of these positions and radicalized them starting in the 1970s. Where the legal realists were
60 The implications of indeterminacy will be discussed in more detail later in the book.
61 See Ludwig Wittgenstein. Philosophical Investigations, trans. G.E.M Anscombe, P.M.S. Hacker, Joachim Schulte. (Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2001). Strangely enough Wittgenstein himself made his name putting forward a very radical positivistic theory which he later repudiated.
62 This is where Hart’s famous problem of the penumbra comes in. See H.L.A Hart. “Positivism and the Separation of Law and Morals.” Harvard Law Review, Vol 71, 1958.
63 This last point is of course devastating to those professionally and morally attached to the vision of judges as impartial reasoners. It implies that even if we wanted the law to be applied in this manner, that can never be. All arguments about whether judges should apply their own values when interpreting law are moot since they will have to do so regardless of whether they wish it. Alternately they can stop being judges. The seriousness of the problem has been sufficient that some authors have tried to develop new positivistic theories of language to blunt the impact of the indeterminacy theory. Carried out by legal partisans with little experience in the philosophy of language, most of these efforts haven’t been especially notable when assessed on their own merits. Some have even been outright embarrassing. A good example is Antonin Scalia’s position, which tries to argue for an entire theory of language on the basis of a few rough examples such as the (comparative) determinancy of the word gun in legal matters. This effort was rightly mocked by Dworkin as a theory of language which apparently didn’t need to reference a single expert in the field. See Antonin Scalia. A Matter of Interpretation: Federal Courts and the Law. (New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1997).                                      - 99 -largely content to say law was indeterminate and put their trust in judges to fill the gaps—partly because they had faith in the intelligence and bias of judicial actors which cannier observers might not share—critical legal theorists took issue with placing such faith in elite figures largely from affluent backgrounds. The crits were also keen to move from a critique of legal formalism as flowing from a philosophical confusion about the nature of language to an ideological analysis of the norms and politics underpinning the purportedly neutral application of rules. If it were true that the law was neither impartial nor impartially applied, the protestations of legal practitioners that they were neutral servants of the common good were bogus. This was a formidable grenade to lob at liberals, who had often given the rule of law pride of place in their normative outlooks. If the critical legal argument were true, then the practice of law involved judges interpreting ideologically charged rules in a biased way to ensure the preservation of elite privileges. This of course included their interpretation of liberal rights, which were deployed in order to depoliticize complex questions which crits wished to be answered democratically, while cloaking such bias under the auspices of upholding the rights of corporations, the wealthy and so on against labor movements, women and other marginalized groups.64
Seen in this way, critical legal theory offered a powerful rebuttal to a central plank of formalistic liberal thinking about the rule of law. But the house of liberalism is sturdy enough to not fall to one destabilizing blow. This is why some crits took the unusual step for legal scholars of offering more philosophically rich and complex total critiques of liberalism. The
64 This element of the critical legal argument has not aged particularly well. There is an almost overwhelming faith in some form of democratization to bring about progressive change, with law and liberal rights being a considerable barrier to the exercise of virtuous majority rule. Very little thought was given to whether the demos might actually hold to conservative or even reactionary viewpoints. See Allan Hutchinson. Waiting for C.O.R.A.F (Toronto, ON: University of Toronto Press, 1995). Ironically, the right-wing counterparts of the Crits felt much the same way. Robert Bork was convinced that a “New Class” of judges were determined to impose their progressive values on a virtuous and largely conservative population. He resisted this very fiercely in the name of democracy, just as convinced that the demos would never change its mind and perhaps embrace left wing economic policies a la Bernie Sanders one day. See Robert Bork. Coercing Virtue: The Worldwide Rule of Judges. (Unites States: Vintage Canada, 2002). My own reading of the jurisprudence will be elaborated on later, but my argument is that judges in liberal societies generally tend
to make liberal rulings. They’re not particularly interested in expanding economic rights, but
they are more sympathetic to advancing Mill’s style liberty.
                                      - 100 -
two most prominent were Roberto Unger and Pierre Schlag, amongst the most ambitious and interesting figures in the critical legal tradition.
Roberto Unger is a mysterious figure; a Renaissance man and polymath who seems to move between disciplines the way most of us change fashions every half decade or so. In the 1970s he became famous as a kind of wunderkind for producing Knowledge and Politics, a total critique of liberalism which purportedly owed little directly to Marxism. He later became known as one of the founders of the critical legal studies movement, though his relation to the movement is rather complex. While elements of Unger’s critical program were indeed taken up by a variety of crits, very few were interested in signing on to the comprehensive political and economic program he painstakingly developed to try and provide a kind of “super liberal” alternative to classical liberalism.65 This is in part because, as highlighted in the introduction, the crits were far more interested in “trashing” than in putting forward alternatives. This became even more pronounced as the critical legal movement fractured into various identity oriented groups, and Unger—perhaps understandably disap-pointed—quickly turned his attention to social theory, practical politics as a member of the Lula administration in Brazil, philosophy, and ultimately even physics and the philosophy of nature with collaborator Lee Smolin.66 Despite this inspiring eclecticism, there are a number of through lines which have consistently run through Unger’s work from his youthful period down to the mature works of the present day.
The most obvious is his interest in context transcendence. Unger’s critique of liberalism is very much defined by a love-hate relationship which becomes more nuanced as his career unfolded. On the one hand he remains deeply beholden to the liberal commitment to freedom, giving it a distinctively Romantic twist by emphasizing an expressivist ethic and pragmatic account of self-creation which wouldn’t be out of place in the work of J.S. Mill. This is undoubtedly why he has wisely characterized his position as super liberal rather than an emphatic, Marxist-based rejection of the entire liberal project. On the other hand, Unger insists that
65 This is best sketched out in his later work, though Unger now shies away from calling it super liberal. See Roberto Unger. What Should the Left Propose? (London: Verso Press, 2005).
66 See Roberto Unger and Lee Smolin. The Singular Universe and the Reality of Time: A Proposal in Natural Philosophy. (Cambridge, UK Cambridge University Press, 2014).                                      - 101 -liberalism has not gone far enough to complete its ambitions. This begins at the psychological level, where he argues liberalism is predicated on a series of dualisms—between reason and desire, epistemic foundational-ism and holism, etc.—which it has never successfully overcome.67 Liberal’s lack of reflection on these dualisms has contributed to the formation of a society wrought with tensions, which liberal legalism attempts to mollify rather than transcend. Instead of carrying out a thoroughgoing dissolution of all forms of false necessity, liberalism set itself up as a new kind of ideology which in turn required the calcification of new institutional forms of authority and legal rules. This constitutes a barrier to the context transcendence of individuals, whose basic impetus is a kind of creative expressivism. For Unger, the key dimension of being human is creating one’s self through time by changing the world around us. One example Unger discusses is the Chomskyan theory of semantic novelty, as discussed in The Self-Awakened:
[T]he Capacity to produce the infinite out of the finite changes everything, shaping our conscious experience in its entirety. It gives us our power of using limited means to generate unlimited variations in language and thought, to express different contents or meaning through similar formal relations among symbols, and to convey the same contents or meaning through different series of symbols. It results in the most signal trait of our conceptual intentional experience: our ability endlessly to revise our thoughts by bringing pressure to bear against their presuppositions: an ability we acquire only through our more basic power to generate endless variation and complication. This power in turn informs our sensational-motor experience by allowing us constantly to change the tacit stories with which we infuse our perceptions and guide our movements.68
In his later work alongside Lee Smolin, Unger extends the ontological implications of this expressivist outlook to a philosophy of nature, arguing that Western thinking has been defined by an effort to subordinate time to eternity. The most obvious example of this at the moment is the
67 See Roberto Unger. Knowledge and Politics. (New York, NY: The Free Press, 1973).
68 Roberto Unger. The Self Awakened: Pragmatism Unbound. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2007) at pg 127.
                                      - 102 -
attachment of physicists to the notion of scientific laws, which exist in some quasi Platonic sense above, and determine physical phenomena which change within, time. Unger insists that, as much as we see our self as an ongoing and undetermined project rather than casting it in essentialist terms, we should see even scientific laws changing and evolving within actually existent time circa a non-teleological evolutionary process a la Darwin. While fascinating, I will not discuss this position in any greater depth here. Interested parties can read my paper in Cosmos and History on the topic.69
The work of Pierre Schlag is less ambitious in its constructive dimen-sions—at least so far—but no less sweeping70 in its total critique of liberalism. Indeed, it gains quite a bit through its focus and willingness to examine every element of liberal thinking and practice. Schlag’s acidic sense of humor and clarity also bring bite to the analysis. In his paper “The Empty Circles of Liberal Justification” Schlag makes the unexpected—given the title—argument that liberal arguments are inherently circular.71 This theme is later taken up in a more comprehensive critique of rationalism in his book on the subject.72 In the paper Schlag argues against liberal legal theorists who wish to provide a justification for the state. Most often these take the form of mythologized moments of constitutional founding—sometimes presented as historically true, as in the case of the American constitution, sometimes hypothetical as in Kant, Rawls, and so on—which generate a set of abstract concepts used to legitimate the liberal state. This includes concepts such as the founding moment, a founding people, a founding moment of consent, and the foundational founding of fundamentally functional sovereignty. The goal of this mythology is to imply that a constitutional regime established centuries ago constitutes a legal system enabling self-rule by the population. But of course this generates substantial problems for liberals, since it is by no means obvious why—particularly if consent is so
69 McManus, Matthew. “Science, Philosophy, and the Return of Time: Reflections on Speculative Thought.” Cosmos and History, Vol 13 (3), December 2017, pp. 238—262.
70 This ambition was present from early in his career. See Pierre Schlag. “Normativity and the Politics of Form.” University of Pennsylvania Law Review, Vol 139, 1991.
71 Pierre Schlag. “The Empty Circles of Liberal Justification.” Michigan Law Review 96 (1997).
72 Pierre Schlag. The Enchantment of Reason. (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1998).                                      - 103 -crucial—anyone should feel obligated to obey a constitutional order created before they were born and enforced without deliberation.73 The way to square this circle is to appeal to reason as a normative outlook which reconciles the mythological narrative about consent with the hard reality of demands for fidelity to the authority of law. Authority and reason must thence be squared with personal freedom and rights so dear to the liberal heart. What we are then left with is an insistence that having freedom and the right of consent doesn’t mean doing what one wishes or even having all that much say in the makeup of law. What freedom means is rationally submitting yourself to the authority of liberal law as codified in the constitution. Why? In part because the liberal just says so, and so long as the state responds to his ideological preferences, everyone better get on board.
Indeed, the rhetoric of reason and the rhetoric of authority are hardly congruent. Reason demands argument and justification. Authority demands submission and obeisance. The irony is that there is an inverse relation between the reasoned character of justification and the authoritative character of authority. The more one insists on a justification of authority, the less authoritative authority will be. Whatever power authority has will stem not from its authoritative status, but rather from the strength of the justification that supports it. Correspondingly, the more one insists on the authoritative character of a justification, the less reasoned it will be. This is a point to which we shall return. In liberal thought, it is not just authority and reason that must be reconciled, but each of them must in turn be reconciled with freedom. The Constitution must be the product of reason and it must be authoritative. But, according to the popular mythology, it must also be the kind of reasoned authority to which the governed freely consent. Authority and freedom may perhaps be compatible, but not obviously so. A political authority that one freely chooses, to which one freely submits, is, of course, not much of a political authority.74
73 Interestingly enough, post-Hart legal positivists seem more alive to this question than many of their liberal counterparts. See Joseph Raz. The Authority of Law: Second Edition. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2009).
74 Pierre Schlag. “The Empty Circles of Liberal Justification.” Michigan Law Review 96 (1997) at pg 8.
                                      - 104 -
Schlag then proceeds to run through a number of other popular liberal “myths” to demonstrate how they fall victim to analogous argumentative circularity. This might appear uncharitable given liberals have dedicated a tremendous amount of energy to providing a theoretical foundation to liberalism. Doesn’t Kant dedicate hundreds of pages to showing how freedom means submitting to the law? Doesn’t Bentham sagely warn that radical reform should (would?) give way to anarchical fallacies which would be hostile to right reason? Schlag’s position is that such grandstanding about reason is no more impressive than justificatory liberal theories about law and authority specifically. This is because the philosophical foundations of liberal thinking are just as Quixotic as their political and legal mythologies. Drawing on the anti-foundationalism of an array of modernist and post-structuralist thinkers, Schlag argues that the faith in reason shown by liberals—particularly legal officials—is really a form of idolatry. To give one clear example, liberals claim to be rationally interpreting the real world by developing a theory of how it operates. But the minute they do so liberals disengage from the real world and move into the realm of theory, then attempt to apply a conceptual framework to empirical phenomena. There is no way of getting around the theory to look at the world simply as it is.75 Yet still liberals insist that this is what they are doing. Not because the claim is plausible in itself, but because it is necessary to uphold an ideological way of thinking.
Schlag claims that this enchantment of reason by liberal myth has serious social consequences. Reason is presented as ruling from above and dictating what individuals should believe and how they should act, because the alternative is chaos and disorder. Schlag rightly points out that this isn’t an effective epistemological defense of reason’s claims but a moral and even aesthetic one; if we don’t place our bets on reason the results will be bad and we will be left with uncertainty. But that is no more a sound argument than the claim that if we don’t believe in God then much evil will emerge. One cannot analytically reason from moral and aesthetic beginnings to epistemological and ontological conclusions. Yet liberals ignore these problems because confronting them would force
75 Of course, this is a Kantian point, and the relationship between such critiques by a prominent liberal and Schlag’s position could use more elaboration.                                      - 105 -them to recognize the circularity and contingency of their outlook; it is just one more theory amongst others, all the pretentious jargon about reason aside.
Schlag’s position is unsparing in its deconstructive ambitions, taking few prisoners on the route to criticizing liberalism comprehensively. His work is endlessly exciting and provocative, designed to be the proverbial Socratic sting to awaken us from apathy. But like the erstwhile Athenian, Schlag sometimes comes across as primarily wise in knowing how little he knows. What we should do in reaction to such criticisms is less clear. While they do demonstrate the contingency of the liberal outlook that doesn’t necessarily mean that liberalism falls. A liberal could just retreat to an anti-foundationalist position circa the late Richard Rorty and claim their ironist position is indeed just one amongst many, but deserves a pragmatic hearing like any oth-er.76 The danger of focusing solely on critique is Wittgensteinian; that it becomes so comprehensive it paradoxically leaves everything exactly as it was barring a little therapeutic reflection (at lower cost than actual therapy hopefully). By contrast Roberto Unger’s constructive arguments provide reasons why even liberals may be persuaded to convert to a more emancipatory form of super-l iberalism which chucks the more rigid conceptual and political commitments holding the doctrine back from achieving its potential. Unger also does address Schlag’s critical challenge early in The Enchantment of Reason that the social sciences tend to be fixated on sucking time from out of the universe to make way for permanent laws and rules.77 Indeed Unger’s entire philosophy of nature insists that time is real in the most profound sense, insisting that the theoretical frameworks we apply to the world must evolve as it does.
76 Richard Rorty Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1989).
77 See Pierre Schlag. The Enchantment of Reason. (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1998) at pg 103.
                                      - 106 -
What I take away from both authors is that there is a sense in which liberal theory falters and needs to resolve its problems practically. This would of course invert the old Marxist expectation that ideology attempts to reconcile the contradictions of the material world in thought. Liberalism is committed to both reason and individualism: reason in the sense of being able to know the world as it is and individuals and their welfare as what ultimately matters.
This brings with it the serious danger of atomistic nihilism. Individuals alone become responsible for determining what matters to them and can find no deeper answer to such issues in a transcendent source or traditionalism. This poses a serious threat to the stability of liberal societies since atomized individuals who can find no source of meaning except themselves would have little to tie them together. Sensitive to this problem, many liberals have argued that individuals can find a sense of meaning in the nation or civil society. These would be formed by voluntary associations and relations between individuals, for instance, in spheres like the economy. But this risks simply bumping the problem up a level by saying individuals will find meaning in rather abstract social ideals and practices which can all too quickly fall apart if individuals cease believing in them. If this too fails the liberal state will have no recourse except to the law which can enforce a shared order.
Unfortunately, very few have carried on the systematic ambitions of Unger’s project or the intense critical sweep of Schlag’s. Indeed, it remains rare to find any project on the left which seeks to transcend or overcome liberalism. Strangely its various forms of post-modern conservatism and right-wing populism are stronger contenders for replacing liberal hegemony with new forms of reactionary and hierarchical politics; Yoram Hazonys nationalism78 and Patrick Deneen’s Catholic pastoralism79 are
78 See Yoram Hazony. “Conservative Democracy.” First Things, January 2019. https://www.firstth-ings.com/article/2019/01/conservative-democracy and more sweepingly Yoram Hazony. The Virtue of Nationalism. (New York, NY: Basic Books, 2018).
79 See Patrick Deneen. “After Liberalism: Can We Imagine a Humane, Post-Liberal Future?” Religion and Ethics, December 2014, http://www.abc.net.au/religion/articles/2014/12/11/4146762. htm and Patrick Deneen. Why Liberalism Failed. (New Haven, CN: Yale University Press, 2018).                                      - 107 -representative intellectual projects. We will return to this issue shortly. Meanwhile, on the political left the energies unleashed by the critical legal studies movement fractured, with many different groups agitating reform on the basis of various partial critiques. I will look at two of the most prominent of these now: critical race and feminist approaches to liberalism and liberal rights.
Liberal Rights and Militant Particularism
We live in one of the darkest moments in American history—a bleak time of spiritual blackout and imperial meltdown. Exactly 25 years ago, in my book Race Matters, I tried to lay bare the realities and challenges to American democracy in light of the doings and sufferings of black people. Back then, I reached heartbreaking yet hopeful conclusions. Now, the heartbreak cuts much deeper and the hope has nearly run out. The nihilism in black America has become a massive spiritual blackout in America. The undeniable collapse of integrity, honesty and decency in our public and private life has fueled even more racial hatred and contempt. The rule of Big Money and its attendant culture of cupidity and mendacity has so poisoned our hearts, minds and souls that a dominant self-righteous neoliberal soul craft of smartness, dollars and bombs thrives with little opposition.80
Cornell West, “America is Spiritually Bankrupt. We Must Fight Back Together.” The Guardian, 2018
In this section I will discuss two variants of what David Harvey calls “militant particularism” and their respective critiques of liberalism and liberal rights: critical race theory and feminist theory.81 My hope is to both provide an exegesis on these movements while
80 Cornell West. “America is Spiritually Bankrupt: We Must Fight Back Together.” The Guardian, January 2018 https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2018/jan/14/america-is-spiritually-bankrupt-we-must-fight-back-together.
81 David Harvey. Justice, Nature, and the Geography of Difference. (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 1996).
                                      - 108 -
demonstrating how they moved from the universalism of total critique to various partial criticisms from the standpoint of different marginalized groups whose intersecting identities were largely but by no means exclusively82 forged by power and authority. While some like Harvey himself decry this fracturing, I believe it had significant benefits in alerting progressives to their own serious blind spots and incorporating historically subordinated voices into movements for change. But this fracturing also blunted the possibility of structural changes to the legal and economic status quo. This limited the capacity of progressive movements and theorists to agitate for genuinely radical change
Critical race theory got its start in the 1980s as the critical legal movement both splintered and incorporated new intellectual voices from previously marginalized groups. Its ambition was to demonstrate the role that law and other coercive social institutions play in entrenching white supremacy in Western states. Since the United States was patient zero for many of these figures, the examples initially tended to discuss the way whites marginalized African Americans through the law. Even there however, scholars like Kimberle Crenshaw83 were determined to demonstrate how the experience of being a racialized minority was by no means universal. This work contributed to the development of intersectional theory; perhaps the most infamous analytical tool in the academy today and the bane of conservatives such as Jordan Peterson.84 Since then however, critical race approaches have blossomed to incorporate critical analysis depicting the legal experience of a very broad array of different
82 I say largely because, though anti-essentialism is currently in vogue, it is by no means hegemonic in either critical race of feminist theory. Indeed some of the fiercest debates on the left are currently about these topics.
83 Kimberle Crenshaw. “Demarginalizing the Intersection of Race and Sex: A Black Feminist Critique of Antidiscrimination Doctrine, Feminist Theory and Antiracist Politics.” The University of Chicago LegalForum,1989.
84 Jordan Peterson. 12 Rules to Life: An Antidote to Chaos. (Toronto, ON: Random House Canada, 2018).                                      - 109 -marginalized groups; from Muslims85 to the Chinese and Indigenous peoples.86
Summarizing the position of critical race scholars is inherently very difficult since it is insistently an epistemically pluralistic approach. Scholars draw on a number of different epistemological and historical positions to describe the experience of marginalization by a liberal legal system which upholds white supremacy; once upon a time aggressively and overtly, and increasingly in a more covert form. This epistemic pluralism also begets a very Berlinian form of value pluralism, though often sans Berlin’s liberalism.87 Since the experience of racialized minorities is highly different, it is exceptionally dangerous to speak about a unified outlook on how the legal system functions, or what needs to be done in order to rectify its endemic injustices. Indeed, from very early on critical race scholars like Krenshaw were keen to insist that defining the experience of marginalization through the singular conceptual category of race was itself dangerous. As she put it in her seminal paper outlining the basics of intersectional theory:
This focus on the most privileged group members marginalizes those who are multiply-burdened and obscures claims that cannot be understood as resulting from discrete sources of discrimination. I suggest further that this focus on otherwise-privileged group members creates a distorted analysis of racism and sexism because the operative conceptions of race and sex become grounded in experiences that actually represent only a subset of a much more complex phenomenon.88
One of the constants in critical race theory one can be reasonably sure about is its critique of liberalism and liberal rights, though even here
85 Sherene Razack. The Eviction of Muslims from Western Law and Politics. (Toronto, ON: University of Toronto Press, 2008).
86 See Constance Backhouse. Colour-Coded: A Legal History of Racism in Canada. (Toronto, ON: University of Toronto Press, 1999).
87 Isaiah Berlin. The Crooked Timber of Humanity: Chap.s in the History of Ideas, ed. Henry Hardy. (New York: Knopf, 1991).
88 Kimberle Crenshaw. “Demarginalizing the Intersection of Race and Sex: A Black Feminist Critique of Antidiscrimination Doctrine, Feminist Theory and Antiracist Politics.” The University of Chicago Legal Forum,1989 at pg 140.
                                      - 110 -
there is a significant divergence of opinion. For some critical race scholars such as Lani Guinier, the problem with the legal system isn’t necessarily the ideals which underpin it. In her excellent work on representative democracy, Guinier runs through the many ways that African Americans remain effectively disenfranchised or see their voting rights limited through ostensibly neutral laws. This is a fundamental problem since, as she puts it “a system is procedurally fair to the extent that it gives each participant an equal opportunity to influence [democratic] outcomes.”89 Since the American system does not accomplish this it cannot be considered sufficiently democratic and therefore requires substantial reform. Other critical race theorists are far more skeptical of the capacity of liberalism to reform itself.90 Most often these figures are inspired by various forms of post-modern anti-foundationalism. They consequently regard liberalism as a kind of false ideological universalism which purports to speak for all mankind, but in fact serves only to marginalize competing ways of looking at the world. It is especially dangerous today as liberalism goes global as various forms of neoliberal international governance. The most sophisticated of these critics usually point to how neoliberalism, as a paradigmatic form of liberalism in late capitalism, plays an increasingly international role in subordinating the cultural and racial other to its atomizing and market driven imperatives. It even aspires to use the law, including offering the carrot of liberal rights, to create new kinds of subjects who will bear little resemblance to their cultural predecessors. As put by Rosemary Coombe and Lindsay Weiss:
89 Lani Guinier. The Tyranny of the Majority: Fundamental Freedoms in Representative Democracy. (New York, NY: The Free Press, 1995) at pg 156.
90 The operating assumption is that this skepticism is directed from the left and its radicals towards the liberal center. But that by no means is inevitable. In his new book on Clarence Thomas, one of the most conservative SCOTUS Judges, Corey Robin points out how Thomas’ black nationalism mutated from radical progressivism into a form of cynical defeatism. This in turn encouraged Thomas to support reactionary carceral politics and capitalism, since he believed that a system of white oppression would always be present in the United States and the only thing blacks could do is toughen up and learn to deal with it. Conceiving of one’s self as a victim would have no benefits, since any political agitation to challenge white supremacy was ultimately a Sisyphean task. This is a fascinating look at how militant particularism need not lead to progressive politics. See Corey Robin. The Enigma of Clarence Thomas. (New York, NY: Metropolitan Books, 2019).                                      - 111 -Neoliberalism is marked by new modes of subjectification that shape social agents to enable competitive relations in markets by “capacitating” people to bear a kind of regulated freedom as “responsibilized” individuals or communities (Brenner, Peck, and Theodore 2010). The molding of new subjectivities is crucial to harnessing cultural goods and practices as heritage resources, optimizing agents to maximize advantages as “autonomized” entities in extended markets, a process that requires social agents be invested with possessive attitudes and vested with proprietary rights so as to engage in market relations.91
These international approaches to culture and race are the cutting edge of critical race theory. They not only carry forward the biting edge of the tradition in demonstrating how a contingent form of liberal universalism and rights is appealed to in order to justify and maintain white, or at least Western hegemony. It also modernizes critical race analysis by moving beyond statism and examining the role neoliberal international institutions play in this process. This is a key point and I will return to it in the next chapter when criticizing neoliberalism. For now, I will move onto feminist critiques of liberalism and liberal rights.
Feminist movements began as liberal projects committed to securing first wave liberal and democratic rights for women. The sentiments of early feminism were well captured by Mary Wollstonecraft in her Vindication of the Rights of Women when she called for extending the rights won by the American and French revolutions to the subordinated sex. This was to be to the advantage not just of women, but also men, who would gain a more affectionate and robust partner through extending rights to all sexes.92 J.S. Mill, under the tutelage of his partner and future wife Harriet Taylor, made similar but somewhat harder edged arguments which generated a considerable amount of pushback and the time.93 As is well known since these pioneering efforts, the feminist
91 See Rosemary Coombe and Lindsay Weiss. “Neoliberalism, Heritage Regimes, and Cultural Rights: Politics in Assemblage.” In Lynn Meskell. Global Heritage: A Reader. (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell, 2015) at pg 47.
92 Mary Wollstonecraft. A Vindication of the Rights of Women. (New York, NY: Norton Library, 1967) at pg 283.
93 John Stuart Mill. On The Subjection of Women, reprinted. In Richard Vandewetering and Lesley Jacobs. John Stuart Mill’s The Subjection of Women: His Contemporary and Modern Critics. (Delmar, NY: Caravan Books, 1999).
                                      - 112 -
movement has become far more fractured. Indeed contemporaneously there are few political and theoretical movements which are more diverse and challenging to summarize. Liberal feminism remains a prominent and important movement, with authors like Martha Nussbaum94 and activists from India’s Vidya Bal to Taylor Swift. But liberal feminism is hardly the only game in town; it is complemented by many more radical counterparts. Since this is a section on critics of liberalism I will focus on these figures here. But I will occasionally gesture to liberal counterparts to explicate through contrast.
One of the most ambitious and controversial figures associated with 1980s radical feminism is Catharine MacKinnon, a structuralist legal critic who did more than anyone to give the movement real political heft. On the one hand MacKinnon’s Towards a Feminist Theory of the State remains a classic critique of liberalism and liberal rights. On the other, her anti-sex feminism, well critiqued by Nussbaum from a liberal standpoint, has aged less well.95 MacKinnon’s scathing criticisms of postmodern feminism96 look increasingly prescient in our paradigm shifting moment. In sum, MacKinnon takes as her starting point the Marxist critique of the liberal state and liberal rights. She is largely sympathetic to Marx’s arguments about the oppressive role state structures play in maintaining class dominance through the law, but relentlessly criticizes him for largely ignoring or trivializing its marginalizing impact on women. Indeed, MacKinnon rightly points out that Marx devoted very little attention to women’s issues at all, beyond a few scattered remarks about the way capital demeaned them.
Engels did a little better, devoting much of his book The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State to exploring women’s exploitation. But MacKinnon remains underwhelmed by these efforts, pointing out how they remain caught in the utopian expectation that a transition to communism will ultimately emancipate women as it allegedly will
94 See Martha Nussbaum. “Political Liberalism and Respect: A Response to Linda Barclay.” SATS: The Northern European Journal of Philosophy 4 (2003).
95 Martha Nussbaum. Sex and Social Justice. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2000).
96 Catharine MacKinnon. “Points Against Postmodernism.” Chicago-Kent Law Review, Vol 25, June 2000.                                      - 113 -emancipate men.97 It has never been the case that men, even brocialist men who talk a big game about emancipation, have ever cared much about women and their needs. According to MacKinnon, men benefit from patriarchy to such an extensive degree that it is difficult to conjecture a future where such concerns ever will be consistently on their radar, even if they care enough to performatively imply sympathy. What is therefore needed is a feminist analysis of the state and its power from a feminist perspective, which can also provide substantive theoretical guidance on how to establish a post-patriarchal society. This will owe much to the spirit of Marxism, while replacing its economistic conceptual categories with those focused on sex and gender.
Unfortunately, as the title of MacKinnon’s book suggests, there is relatively little in the way of a full theory of the state provided in Towards a Feminist Theory of the State. After her criticisms of Marxism and socialism as emancipatory theories are completed, she moves on to the proverbial focus of the book which is the critique of patriarchy in liberal democracy. This mainly pivots around MacKinnon criticizing the different ways formally impartial liberal rights and law serve to reinforce patriarchal authority. This includes its laws on rape, abortion rights, and most infamously pornography. MacKinnon points out that on each of these issues the liberal state postures as a neutral arbiter and protector of individual rights. The reality is that these rights are largely to the benefit of men, sometimes explicitly so. In rape cases, the immense number of protections granted to accused sexual predators and the intense scrutiny accusers are subjected to serves to minimize the extent and impact of predation in our society. With regard to abortion, the public/private distinction so central to liberal law—and foundational to Roe v Wade in American jurisprudence—obfuscates the significant way that women are treated unequally in private life. The consequence is that abortion is primarily framed as a woman having control over sex and sexual reproduction, retrenching a conception of femininity as primary about child rearing. There is also a tacit assumption that this power complements women’s rights to be in control of when she will have sexual intercourse. This of course misses
97 Catharine MacKinnon. Towards a Feminist Theory of the State. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1989) at Part I Chap. 2.
                                      - 114 -
that access to abortion is not a reflection of women’s empowerment over sexuality, but a corrective to their imposed powerlessness in a patriarchal society. Both advocates and critics of abortion miss this with their liberal interpretation of women as equal rights bearers in society who are privately empowered through the right to choose. While abortion is a step forward, it is hardly sufficient. Finally, and most infamously, MacKinnon takes issues with the prevalence of pornography and the manner in which it degrades women and their sexuality. She argues that pornographic films and images at best depict women in a subordinate role to men, and at worst cater to violent and predatory fantasies. Controversially, MacKinnon makes the empirical claim that exposure to this material inspires men to act out these degrading and violent behaviors in real life. This is justified by the liberal state as ultimately a matter of free expression which cannot be criminalized without contravening the speech rights of participants.
MacKinnon’s arguments on this point are eminently contentious, since she effectively claims that the indignity of these portrayals and the impact they have on sexual norms outweighs the right of individuals to produce and consume pornography. But as critics have pointed out, this cedes a great deal of power to the state to determine what constitutes an indignity worth constraining rights to speech and expression.98
Mackinnon is on more solid ground with her next set of criticisms. She criticizes the commercial justification for pornography as a free exchange between actresses engaging in filmed sex acts and producers. In a capitalist society preventing such exchanges constitutes an unjustifiable interference in market activities between free adults. On this point MacKinnon leans back into Marx and the socialist critique of capitalism. She observes that under a patriarchal system where women’s earning power is extremely limited, characterizing exchanges in the pornography industry as “free” demonstrates the liberal propensity to abstract away from the real material conditions of life. Liberal law serves to obscure this reality by presenting as free what are truly exploitative exchanges.
98 Dworkin directs a sharp critique her way from a liberal perspective. See Ronald Dworkin. Freedom’s Law: The Moral Reading of the American Constitution (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1997) pgs 227—243.                                      - 115 -MacKinnon’s theoretical outlook is very much a form of materialism, centered as it is most directly on women’s bodies and the physical experiences they undergo under patriarchal conditions. This means she is highly critical of the positivistic idealism presented in liberal law, which abstracts from the real conditions of life; whether it be women in the household where they face sexual subordination or in the marketplace where their opportunities are limited and many are forced to take degrading work. However, this opens MacKinnon to a number of philosophical objections by anti-essentialist feminists99 who don’t situate the body at the epicenter of their analysis; performativity theory being a famous exam-ple.100 By essentializing the experience of women by locating their marginalization in the sexualized body and material practice, she also risks ignoring the ideological dimensions of jouissance which are more subtle but serve to reinforce oppression. This subtle point was made by Wendy Brown, echoing earlier analysis by Simone de Beauvoir in Volume II of The Second Sex.101 Brown observes that marginalization is never as simple as a coercive state apparatus and patriarchal figures who impose themselves on victims.102 There are almost always circumstances where marginalized identities become attached to their self-conception as victims and performatively reinforce and even embrace that identity. This serves to empower the very processes that marginalized them in the first place. As Erich Fromm observed some time ago, it is a very dangerous conceit for progressives to assume that everyone wants to be free, even if that is their stated contention. Many long for an escape from the burdens of
99 MacKinnon fired back with a fierce denunciation in Catharine MacKinnon. “Points Against Postmodernism.” Chicago-Kent Law Review, Vol 25, June 2000.
100 See Judith Butler. Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity (New York, NY: Routledge, 1990). Though it is worth noting that Butler herself seemed sensitive to criticisms, performativity theory moved too dramatically in the direction of elitist idealism and political aesthetics. Her later work on the body and the psyche, not to mention a refocus on Althusserian interpellation theory, seems to have been meant to counter such accusations. See Judith Butler. Bodies That Matter: On the Discursive Limits of Sex (New York, NY: Routledge, 1993) and Judith Butler. The Psychic Life of Power: Theories In Subjection. (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1997).
101 See Simone de Beauvoir. The Second Sex: Complete Edition, trans. Constance Borde. (New York, NY: Vintage Books, 2011). Particularly the Chap.s on motherhood and daughters.
102 Wendy Brown. States of Injury: Power and Freedom in Late Modernity. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995).
                                      - 116 -
freedom103 and the disorder it represents, which may explain why there are a number of far-right women who are highly critical of feminism for apparently destroying women.104 MacKinnon’s fixation on the body and materialism does provide a vital counterweight to liberal idealism in theory and formalism in the law, but misses the discursive and psychic dimensions of power vital to understanding the ideological persistence of patriarchy through the twenty-first century.
In her defense, some of MacKinnon’s anti-essentialist counterparts went too far in the other direction by entirely moving away from the body and towards a form of historical idealism in the form of discourse theoretics and deconstruction. Drucilla Cornell is amongst the most brilliant theorists in this tradition. She draws on an eclectic arrange of liberal and post-structuralist figures to argue that the feminist quest is for freedom rather than equality per se, which is defined by Cornell as the ability of all individuals to pursue their own happiness in their own way. In her argument with Thomas Nagel on abortion, Cornell frames this position quite explicitly in liberal terms:
The alternative to [Nagel’s] proposal is to recognize women as free persons who, like men, must orient themselves as sexuate beings, as person’s legally
free to do this in their own way as a matter of right But once we are
equivalently evaluated as free persons with maximum equal liberty, the question of what scope of rights, opportunities, and social goods would be needed to maintain freedom and equality would, of course, have to be addressed.105
Cornell then goes on to invoke Rawls, Dworkin and Sen as exemplary liberal theorists whose theories of distributive justice might be oriented to service feminist purposes along these lines. This is a fine approach to take,
103 Erich Fromm. Escape from Freedom. (New York, NY: Henry Holt and Company, 1994).
104 Marion Trejo brought to my attention that this is one of the major themes of the recent show The Handmaid’s Tale based on Margaret Atwoods classic book of the same name. The character of Serena Joy espoused the reactionary ideology which later served as a justification for the totalitarian regime of Gilead, which ironically later forced her into a subordinated position in line with her own outlook.
105 See Drucilla Cornell. At the Heart of Freedom: Feminism, Sex, and Equality. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1998) at pg 89.                                      - 117 -and I will address it myself in Chap. 4. However there is a sense in which Cornell goes too far in ignoring MacKinnon’s prescient warnings about the role the liberal state plays in entrenching male supremacy, and its hostility to addressing issues of egalitarian distributive justice so long as it remains dominated by capital. To my mind the proper balance between the two is, again, struck by Brown, who is attentive to the need for constructive visions of democratic emancipation for women—and everyone really—while recognizing the reality of neoliberal hegemony in the twenty-first century. Indeed her recent work showcases how much of the post-modern conservative reaction we are seeing is the product of these material conditions and the resentment of those at the top towards those at the bottom who are calling for redistributive efforts.106 A capable critical theory of liberalism cannot rely on moral condemnation and even an idealist deconstruction of power and discourse. It needs the hard-edged qualities of a materialism sufficiently assertive to show why many women remain too poor to resist marginalization and ideology remains too well funded and empowered by capital to cede ground to calls for distributive justice along feminist or any other lines.
This brings to a close my comments on two major forms of militant particularism. Both critical race and feminist theory agitate against liberalism and liberal rights for varied reasons and on behalf of different, but occasionally intersecting, groups. What they share is a skepticism of legal formalism’s claims to neutrality in the application of the law and in respecting rights.. This is because the law itself is not neutral, but rather operates to uphold white privilege and patriarchy. Most critical race theorists, including conservatives like Clarence Thomas, and feminists are unlikely to deny this characterization. Where the profound splits come in are over how to respond to these inadequacies in liberal capitalist societies. For commentators like Guinier and Nussbaum, the solution isn’t to abandon liberalism; far from it. Rather it is to force liberal societies to adhere more closely to their underpinning principles by extending and adequately realizing them for groups who have historically not been their beneficiaries. Others are more radical in their insistence that liberalism
106 Wendy Brown. In the Ruins of Neoliberalism: The Rise of Antidemocratic Politics in the West. (New York, NY: Columbia University Press, 2019).
11S M. McManus
and liberal rights are outdated or can only ever be mired in reactionary projects. We therefore need to get rid of them if we are to ever see emancipation for marginalized groups, though even on this point there remains significant disagreements about how to even go about criticizing liberal society. Do we push for a Marxist feminist analysis a la MacKinnon or a form of post-structuralism such as the early Judith Butler? Should historically marginalized ethnic and racialized groups dissociate from liberal societies or try to enact radical change from within? My own positions on this subject matter will be presented in Chap. 4. Until then we have to look at another, perhaps more important critique of liberalism and liberal rights to have emerged in recent years on the political right. These are the critiques levelled by various forms of post-modern conservatism.
Liberal Rights and Post-Modern Conservatism
Thus the liberal experiment contradicts itself, and a liberal society will inevitably become “postliberal.” The postliberal condition can retain many aspects that are regarded as liberalism’s triumphs—equal dignity of persons, in particular—while envisioning an alternative understanding of the human person, human community, politics, and the relationship of the cities of Man to the city of God. Envisioning a condition after liberalism calls us not to restore something that once was but to consider something that might yet be; it is a project not of nostalgia but of vision, imagination, and construction.107
Through much of the twentieth century liberalism and conservatism operated in a sometimes-uneasy truce with one another. With the defeat of fascism on the right the main competitor of both liberalism and conservatism was global communism on the political left, embodied in the tyrannical and frightening form of the Soviet Union, China, and their various satellite and allied states. There were various responses to this threat, some good, others bad. Many liberal states tried to halt to creep of Marxist sympathies through implementing welfarist reforms to
107 Patrick Deneen. “Unsustainable Liberalism.” First Things, August 2012.                                      - 119 -ameliorate class conflict by providing for the material needs of the economically marginalized. This was a positive development that represents, as Fawcett would point out, the ideological flexibility of liberalism in practice; a virtue not always recognized by its enemies.108 On the other hand there were more strident reactions to the influence of communism in the form of McCarthyism and interventionist imperialism, many of which have not aged well in the history books. For many conservatives, the time period was one of serious compromise and ideological fluidity. These were not simply in response to external disputes. The fall of Nazism had seriously discredited nationalism, racism and imperialism, which necessitated a process of dissociation carried out by outlets such as the National Review in the United States or the CDU in Germany. Many of these made their peace with liberal democracy and even social welfarism in the case of the British Conservative party upon reelection in 1951. Some might have expected the reorientation to be permanent, a la the “end of ideology” thesis popular through the latter half of the twentieth century. Many might have seen conservatism as more or less on its way out, to be replaced for some kind of liberal managerialism which would upend the usual division between the hierarchical and traditionalist right and the radical egalitarian left.
However, things were never nearly as harmonious as they appeared, as anyone paying serious attention might have noted. Conservatives didn’t make peace with liberalism, and certainly not welfarism, so much as adopt a strategic cease fire for the purposes of upending communism. Following the Dionysian revel of its final defeat came the hangover of existential uncertainty. As Corey Robin observes in The Reactionary Mind the wall—both the actual Berlin Wall and Roger Water’s prop celebrating its collapse—had scarcely fallen before various right-wing pundits were bemoaning the decadence of permissive liberalism.109 Neoconservatives insisted that without an enemy to direct collective attention energy, Western citizens would fall into consumerism and civic apathy. There needed to be some grand project to martial them to Homeric heights.
108 Edmund Fawcett. Liberalism: The Life of An Idea: Second Edition. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2018).
109 Corey Robin. The Reactionary Mind Second Edition: Conservatism from Edmund Burke to Donald Trump. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2018).
                                      - 120 -
Initially this role was to be fulfilled by the War on Terror, which interestingly enough might be better called the War on Truth. Karl Rove infamously opined that the new American empire would create its own reality, while the fact checkers and eggheads in the “reality based community” would be left to reflect on the world historical accomplishments of their better.110 This Miltonian hubris came to an all too predictable end when reality, to the surprise of all, turned out to be more real than the neoconservatives had expected. Neo-conservative efforts at nation building cost hundreds of thousands of lives—or at least the thousands of American lives which mattered to John Bolton—and trillions of dollars. It also immensely damaged the reputation of neo-conservatism across the globe, especially as the Bush regime presided over the worst economic downturn since the Great Depression. As a consequence, the universalis-tic particularism of neo-conservatism, where one state and its allies were to speak for all, and remake the world along the lines of some pseudo-teleological vision of history, has increasingly faded into obscurity.
What is interesting about neo-conservatism is that it was, in some respects, an ideological supplement to liberalism and especially neoliber-alism.111 It wasn’t interested in dismantling or challenging liberal capitalism, partly due to residual Cold War fidelity and partly out of a real commitment to its hierarchies and power relations. War outside was a necessary excess in order to stabilize a potentially decadent liberal order within. The right to do as you wish—indeed tied to an insistence that you Enjoy! even the feeling of wanting something—was tied to responsibilities, in this case to defend your country, advance its values, and halt the advance of its perceived and real enemies. In this respect neo-conservatism remained within the paradigm of liberal imperialist adventurism, which includes a long genealogy of Conradian harlequins from Disraeli through Kipling and Bush. In a bizarre sense its collapse contributed to the decline in conservative support for liberalism, since without the possibility of more Arab countries to bomb, the more reactionary members were forced to return chastened to the realm of domestic xenophobia.
110 See Ian Shapiro. “Demise of the Neoconservative Dream From Afghanistan to Iraq.” Yale Courses, November 15th 2019. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LiyeOcdBYnM.
111 In the sense described by Zizek. See Slavoj Zizek. The Plague of Fantasies. (London, UK: Verso Books, 1997).                                      - 121 -This is where post-modern conservatism emerges as a distinctively twenty-first century reaction against the alleged extremes of liberalism. The starting point was in 2010 with the election of Victor Orban in Hungary and his promise to establish a distinctively illiberal democracy. This was made explicit in his 2014 speech to the Baile Tusnad, where he discusses the need to reconcile the liberal emphasis on the individual with the (national and religious) community:
Consequently, what is happening today in Hungary can be interpreted as an attempt of the respective political leadership to harmonize relationship between the interests and achievement of individuals—that needs to be acknowledged—with interests and achievements of the community, and the nation. Meaning, that Hungarian nation is not a simple sum of individuals, but a community that needs to be organized, strengthened and developed, and in this sense, the new state that we are building is an illiberal state, a non-liberal state. It does not deny foundational values of liberalism, as freedom, etc.. But it does not make this ideology a central element of state organization, but applies a specific, national, particular approach in its stead.112
Since Orban won his initial election and managed to change the Hungarian constitution to repeatedly entrench his hold on power, a number of illiberal post-modern conservative regimes have taken hold. This includes Poland, until recently Italy,113 Brazil and of course the United States. I have already discussed these developments in collaboration with others at great length in both The Rise of Post-Modern Conservatism and What is Post-Modern Conservatism: Essays on Our Hugely Tremendous Times.ni Rather than repeating these comments here, I will summarize the positions of Yoram Hazony and Patrick Deneen, who
112 Csaba Toth. “Full text of Victor Orbans speech at Baile Tu§nad (Tusnadfurdo) of 26 July 2014.” The Budapest Beacon, July 29th 2014. https://budapestbeacon.com/full-text-of-viktor-orbans-speech-at-baile-tusnad-tusnadfurdo-of-26-july-2014/.
113 Matteo Salvini was recently ousted from the Italian government as of this writing.
114 See Matthew McManus. The Rise of Post-Modern Conservatism: Neoliberalism, Post-Modern Culture, and Reactionary Politics. (Gewerbestrasse, SW: Palgrave Macmillan, 2019) and Matthew McManus. What is Post-Modern Conservatism: Essays on Our Hugely Tremendous Times. (Winchester, UK: Zero Books, 2019).
                                      - 122 -
provide the most convincing115 and contemporary theoretical116 defenses of post-modern conservatism.
Hazony’s arguments against liberalism are presented in their most sustained form in The Virtue of Nationalism and supplementary essays for a variety of conservative outlets. Like Deneen, he often mixes a combination of hard-edged rhetoric towards liberalism and especially the Enlightenment with qualifying comments likely intended to offer an olive branch to classical liberal moderates and conservative rationalists on the American right.117 Hazony regards liberalism, at least in its “imperial form” as a rationalistic philosophy which holds that all peoples should be “united under a single regime of law, promulgated and maintained by a single supranational authority.”118 This cosmopolitan interpretation might appear overstated, but it flows from Hazony’s interpretation of liberalism as a philosophy which fundamentally wants to efface the cultural differences respected by conservative historical empiricism. Kant’s contentions against the heteronomy of traditional epistemology and belief are paradigmatic here, as are his convictions that the emergence of the liberal Enlightenment demonstrated man’s maturity from “his selfimposed immaturity.”119 Because the nation state is invariably the bearer of traditionalist particularism and its heteronymous mysticism, liberals like Kant ultimately do no trust it to adequately uphold universal human rights. As a consequence, they become committed to a cosmopolitan project which gradually seeks to supplant the nationalist state.120 While
115 There are of course more radical and overtly racist defenses offered by more fringe figures. See Ricardo Duchesne. Canada in Decay: Mass Immigration, Diversity, and the Ethnocide of Euro-Canadians. (London, UK: Black House Publishing Ltd., 2017).
116 There are also empirical defenses of this phenomena offered by figures like Eatwell and Goodwin. See Roger Eatwell and Matthew Goodwin. National Populism: The Revolt Against Liberal Democracy. (London, UK: Pelican Books, 2018).
117 Yoram Hazony. “Conservative Rationalism Has Failed.” The American Mind, June 24th 2019.
118 Yoram Hazony. The Virtue of Nationalism. (New York, NY: Basic Books, 2018) at pg 16.
119 See “What is Enlightenment” in Immanuel Kant. On History, trans. Lewis White Beck, Robert E. Anchor, and Emil. L Fackenheim. (United States: The Library of Liberal Arts, 1957).
120 Hazony draws parallels between this liberal ambition and the Catholic goal of establishing a worldwide church, often cooperating with political institutions such as the Holy Roman Empire. The Peace of Westphalia in 1648 halted this imperial project, giving way to a new nationalist order. Strangely, Hazony has more praise for Protestant Christianity, which he sees as ultimately amenable to the nationalist outlook he wants to restore. The irony is that liberalism mainly got its head start                                      - 123 -this was once considered a utopian dream, particularly through the nineteenth century, Hazony argues that the bastardization of nationalist principles by imperial powers like Nazi Germany made the cosmopolitan project viable in a world tired of war. Consequently we saw the emergence of major internationalist and increasingly transnational institutions such as the United Nations and the European Union; largely driven by liberal elites who did not trust the more conservative public to put their faith in distant and alien legal regimes. The hope was to finally and conclusively realize the Kantian project through the incremental reduction of national sovereignty and the assumption of greater authority by these cosmopolitan institutions. This would of course also benefit the liberal elites, who, as Stephen Harper put it. are often “anywheres” who wish to move across the globe and feel little fidelity to a given place and way of life as do conservative “somewhere.”121 Liberal elites would also gain worldwide power and influence through the implementation of the cosmopolitan project, which is also quite the incentive.
By contrast Hazony puts forward an “order of free and independent nations, each pursuing its own traditions and understanding” as an attractive alternative to liberal cosmopolitanism.122 Each would be distinct, and each would constitute a communal experiment in how to lead a good human life. This may include liberal societies, with partial qualification. One assumes, perhaps unwisely, that Hazony would accept liberal hyper-modernism if it contained itself to a specific national polity and was consistent with the traditions and understanding of that people. But they would no longer regard liberalism as flowing from universal reason and so needing to be implemented globally. Instead they would take an ironist position in relation to liberalism, recognizing its
in Protestant states such as Great Britain and the Netherlands; both of which were imperialist states driven in part by nationalist ambitions seeking to spread their way of life-including liberalism and capitalism-elsewhere. Prussia was by no means a liberal state in the eighteenth century, though there was a thaw during the reign of “enlightened monarchs” like Frederick II. But it was a very Protestant polity, which contributed to Kant’s own liberal individualism and his theological commitment to religion within the bounds of each persons reason. How Hazony would square	these
historical tensions is unclear from reading The Virtue of Nationalism.
121 See Stephen Harper. Right Here, Right Now: Politics and Leadership	in	the	Age	of Disruption.
(Toronto, ON: Penguin Random House Canada, 2018).
122 Yoram Hazony. The Virtue of Nationalism. (New York, NY: Basic Books, 2018) at pg 16.
                                      - 124 -
contingent and historically empirical roots in their traditions and outlooks. This would of course approximate the situation in the United States, the United Kingdom and other liberal Anglo countries, who since at least the reign of Empress Victoria of India, sought to maintain their freedoms while dissociating from the universalistic liberalism characteristic of imperial cosmopolitans.
However, Hazony admits that he has his own preferences regarding national experiments. While he admires the United States, his own desire would be for a more “conservative democracy” that what one finds in liberal societies. This overlaps with his arguments for nationalism, since according to Hazony, conservatism is aligned with his global nationalism in not being a “universal theory [which proposes] a single answer to the question of the political good” at all times and everywhere.123 Here Hazony follows Robert Bork in castigating liberals for rejecting “particu-larity—respect for difference, circumstance, history, and the irreducible complexity of human beings and human societies.”124 By contrast conservatism is driven by a form of “historical empiricism” where the authority of government is vested in constitutional traditions and the long experience of a “given nation.” This means that a true conservative democracy would be an experiment which goes further than a return to nationalism through a domestic rejection of liberal universalism and an embrace of traditionalist particularism. Such a democracy would: be oriented by a public religion; reject legal rationalism and positivism for traditional wisdom (one suspects he is referring to something approximating the evolutionary wisdom embodied in the common law); would impose a curriculum based on constitutional and religious traditions; require integration and assimilation from migrants; reject empire and international institutions; and finally, counteract the corrosive impact of the market where necessary. Taken together, a conservative democracy provides a solution to the national and spiritual disintegration wrought by liberalism. As Hazony puts it:
123 Yoram Hazony. “Conservative Democracy.” First , January 2019. https://www.firstthings. com/article/2019/01/conservative-democracy.
124 Robert Bork, Coercing Virtue: The Worldwide Rule of Judges. (United States of America: Vintage Canada, 2002) at pg 5.                                      - 125 -The current political reality of disintegrating national states, ruined families, and eviscerated religious traditions is the direct consequence of the embrace of liberal dogma as a kind of universal salvation creed throughout much of the West. At this point, liberalism is widely accepted as a substitute for tradition, wisdom, and empiricism—which is another way of saying that it has replaced competent reasoning as well. Many can now see that the nations of the West are hurtling toward an abyss. I have offered a sketch of what it would mean to back away from it. I have suggested that there is no need for a revolutionary revision of the great constitutional documents of the Anglo-American political tradition. But the liberal axiom system must be set aside: We must cease to consider it the source of our political institutions. We must stop teaching it as a dogma to our children. And we must retrieve older traditions of Anglo-American political thought, which may yet be revived as a political model that can be called conservative democracy.125
Hazony’s position can be criticized on a broad number of different fronts. One of the most obvious is methodological and empirical. Hazony argues that historical empiricism is preferable to liberal rationalism both globally and domestically. Yet his own chosen examples of nationalist societies embodying the ideal are highly telling. Needless to say, the United Kingdom, France, the Dutch Republic, and the United States were hardly content to live and let live by carrying on their own particular traditions within a carefully circumscribed territory. Each involved themselves in unrivalled empire building on a global scale; partly motivated by liberal universalism, but also a desire for national glory and enrichment. His last significant example, Israel, is even more contentious as a powerful state which has occupied the territory of another nation for decades. Given this, it isn’t clear why historical empiricism would inspire us to embrace nationalism, even if we don’t bother to look further afield than Hazony’s chosen exemplars. If we do take this very minor liberty then it is easy to point out that his decision to exclude German—and one might add Italian and Japanese—nationalism from the discussion because they were “imperialist” powers seems even more biased and selective. Nazi
125 Yoram Hazony. “Conservative Democracy.” First Things, January 2019. https://www.firstthings. com/article/2019/01/conservative-democracy.
                                      - 126 -
Germany, Italy, and Japan were hyper-nationalist powers which engaged in empire building in competition with the other nationalist states Hazony invokes like the United Kingdom, France, and the Netherlands. Not to mention the United States—MacArthur wasn’t vacationing when he was kicked out of the Philippines after all. The result is that the historical empirical arguments for nationalism seem very weak unless we pull the whole “not real nationalism” card, in which case the argument isn’t about empiricism—historical or otherwise—but projecting a scrubbed ideal type divorced from history.
More importantly, Hazony’s positions can be immanently criticized from a moral perspective as well. He claims to want an experimental approach to national identity, with each community developing a new way of life. This strikes me as appealing, but again his argument that such experimentalism must take place at a certain scale seems deeply arbitrary to me. If experiments in living are valuable communally, it isn’t clear why experimentation should be rejected for individuals through a rejection of homogenizing traditions. This is of course what liberalism is all about circa the Kantian criticisms of traditionalist heteronomy and Mill’s endorsement of “experiments in living.” Hazony seems to think experimentation and particularity are worthwhile at the national level, but should be denied to individuals living within nationalist societies, as they must be encouraged to share religious beliefs and traditions. This not only seems arbitrary but out of whack with our considered priorities. For most people around the globe, the major threat to their particularity in the twenty-first century is not imperial intervention but domestic and illiberal authoritarianism which invokes the need to stabilize identity and enforce shared beliefs. In this respect, as well as many others, Hazony’s anxieties seem out of sync with the real dangers to particularity posed by right-wing authoritarianism in the 21st century.
Patrick Deneen is another figure who achieved widespread prominence after the election of Donald Trump for his withering critiques of liberalism. While Hazony’s arguments can largely be dismissed for the reasons mentioned, Deneen marshals more powerful arguments to his cause. In Why Liberalism Failed he makes the almost Marxist argument that liberalism has faltered not because of external pressures and conflict. Liberalism failed because it succeeded. This form of immanent critique is naturally more powerful than the external criticisms launched by Hazony because                                      - 127 -it puts liberalism in a more existential bind. A liberal society cannot be sustained without ultimately undermining the conditions on which it depends, resulting in final failure and a turn to alternatives. However, the power of this immanent critique comes at a price, a part of which is that Deneen must demonstrate that any crises threatening to topple liberalism is not primarily the result of external antagonists. He also has to provide a persuasive account of what liberalism is not only at the theoretical level—a ready temptation for a political theorist—but how liberalism operates in practice.126 I do not think he is ultimately successful in either respect, but the point is galvanizing enough to warrant substantial analysis.
Deneen opens Why Liberalism Failed with the observation that of the three great ideologies of the twentieth century only liberalism is left standing. Its communist rivals on the left and fascist contenders on the right have been defeated and relegated to the ash heap of history. This makes it all the stranger that in the late 2010s liberalism should find itself in the midst of an existential crisis. As they say, things were not supposed to end up this way. After 1989 we were to have reached the “end of history” and liberal democracy was to be the only viable game in town. Despite this we have recently seen the emergence of new contenders for liberalism’s crown; from a resurgent socialism to the rise of post-modern conservatism. The reason for this, according to Deneen, is that liberalism is inherently unstable. Our inability to recognize this stems from regarding liberalism primarily as a political rather than metaphysical doctrine a la Rawls. Or worse, regarding it as no doctrine at all, but merely a neutral ideology concerning the rule of law and the proper extension of liberal rights to all.
By contrast Deneen argues that liberalism is very much committed to a specific metaphysics. 'tte real founder of liberalism was not John Locke,
126 This challenge has toppled more than one exceptionally competent political theorist. To this day one of the primary objections levelled against figures like Alasdair MacIntyre is their conflation of liberal theory as presented in canonical works with praxis. Ironically such critics of liberalism actually take its philosophical justifications too strictly at their word, while missing the nuanced ways in which liberal societies have adapted themselves to reconcile a variety of competing tendencies. This objection has been prominently raised in recent times by Fawcett, who insists that liberal theory is but one element of the broader tradition and politics of liberalism. See Edmund Fawcett. Liberalism: 7The Life of An Idea: Second Edition. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2018).
                                      - 128 -
Thomas Jefferson, or even Christopher Hitchens. It was Francis Bacon who we have to blame (or thank) for the world’s ascendant political tradition. This is because Bacon was the first figure to systematize the new techno-scientific metaphysics that began to emerge in the Renaissance and has now come to dominate the earth.127 The foundation of the scientific mindset is viewing the world as a collection of objects which can be manipulated for human needs. The consequence of its gradual extension and colonization of all spheres of human life is a world governed by what is sometimes called “instrumental reason.” The world, and even our selves, were “things” which existed in relation to others and needed to be manipulated in the pursuit of self-interested desire. This provided the metaphysical foundation for the liberal worldview, which would quickly grow to dominate the globe. This in turn constituted a rejection of traditionalist culture, which proved to be a barrier to the expansion of liberalism. As Deneen puts it:
Dewey traced his though back to Francis Bacon, whom he considered the most important thinker in history. Bacon, he wrote in his Reconstruction in Philosophy, teaches that ‘scientific laws do not lie on the surface of nature. They are hidden and must be wrested from nature by an active and elaborate technique of inquiry.’... Today’s liberals recoil from such bald expressions of hubris, but rather than reject Dewey’s efforts to eliminate culture toward the end of dominating nature, they are inclined to accept the liberal belief in human separateness from nature and insist upon the conquest of humanity-whether through the technological control of the natural world (‘conservative’ liberals) or the technological control of reproduction and mastery of the human genetic code (‘progressive’ liberals). A core feature of the liberal project is antipathy to culture as a deep relationship with a nature that defines and limits human nature.128
127 Heidegger is the philosopher who more than any other emphasized this point. However, he goes deeper than Deneen in arguing that it makes little sense to arbitrarily insulate the Christian and even Grecian epochs from blame for the triumph of nihilistic technical thinking. Oddly enough Deneen never really engages this well- known point, though whether for expositional reasons or to protect his own political opinions is unclear. Martin Heidegger. The Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays. (New York, NY: Harper Perennial, 2013).
128 Patrick Deneen. Why Liberalism Failed. (New Haven, CN: Yale University Press, 2018) at pg 71.                                      - 129 -It is this core relationship between reason’s desire for technological control of the natural world and human life which defines liberalism. The consequences across society have been dramatic. Liberalism gradually eroded cultures which insisted human nature must be limited and committed to a vision of the good life. Moving beyond Deneen slightly we might say this is in part because a vision of the good life entails an account of human limitations. As MacIntyre and other Aristotelians would observe, the finitude of time and capacity we have available force us to choose which forms of excellence are worth pursuing. This in turn precludes our developing other aspects of ourselves. In time this generates a sense of accomplishment and selfhood which is no longer available in liberal post-modernity. Liberals reject any such limitations, and consequently any account of superiority or quality which flows from working within and surpassing them one at a time. This is because in theory liberals claim that all people must be treated as moral equals, regardless of their relative worth. At the same time, they insist that everyone must be free, allowing mass material inequality to persist in the name of allowing capitalist liberty. The consequence of this is that our demands for freedom and equality lead to the generation of a powerful and interventionist state which seeks to emancipate us from all the hardships of nature, but primarily works to the benefit of the powerful and affluent. According to Deneen such a state is not an exception to the liberal program of respecting moral equality and enabling greater freedom, but the immanent endpoint of liberalism applied consistently and successfully for hundreds of years. The consequence is we now live in a society defined by a “new aristocracy.” It talks left and lives right, preaching the virtues of tolerance and acceptance for alternative lifestyles while barricading itself in private schools and gated communities. The new aristocracy enjoys immense privileges and advantages while rarely, if ever, encountering the mass of people who did not happen to win the genetic lottery. For the rest of us, we are moving towards a world predicated by economist Tyler Cowen. The low wage majority will “settle in places that look a lot like Texas: cheap housing, some job creation, and subpar government services. Political leaders ... should consider erecting entire cityscapes of favelas with low rent and free internet, thus offering a virtual world of
                                      - 130 -
distraction from the grim poverty and spiritual desiccation that will become a permanent way of life for most citizens.”129
This grim future of KFC, internet porn, and Texas gone global is what Deneen is especially keen to avoid. His analysis is frequently stunning in its breadth and power; there is a reason everyone from Archbishop Chaput to Cornel West have found good things to say about it. Deneen is also admirable in providing a critical text which is refreshingly antipartisan in its orientation. Progressives and conservatives, maybe even progressive conservatives, will all find material worth looking at. However, I believe Deneen’s book remains open to the criticism that it has overstated its case. Hazony’s arguments against liberalism and for nationalism may be less powerful than Deneen’s, but the former at least recognizes that he is primarily making a normative case against a powerful opponent. Deneen’s immanentist reasoning makes the stronger claim that liberalism is not only bad, but it has failed. But my reading of the empirical evidence supplied doesn’t support such a dramatic conclusion, and for that matter Deneen himself seems unconvinced at points. His deep concerns about the Texasization of the world should liberalism continue are telling. Post-modern conservate populism and the return of socialism may pose significant threats to at least neoliberal hegemony. But a breakup of hegemonic ideology and politics doesn’t necessarily imply imminent collapse. Liberalism may face dangerous or even existential threats. But it has before, as Deneen himself acknowledges, and emerged victorious against all rivals. It would be unwise to assume it could not rebound all the stronger once more, as liberalism routinely has in the past.
Moreover, unlike Hazony’s vision of a conservative democracy, Deneen offers relatively little by way of an alternative to liberalism. Indeed, Deneen even insists that we should resist the “impulse to devise a new and better political theory in the wake of liberalism’s simultaneous triumph and demise . ” since the “search for a comprehensive theory is what gave rise to liberalism and successor ideologies in the first place.”130 He is also keen to insist that whatever replaces the liberal system doesn’t chuck its innovations, from the protections offered by rights discourse to
129 Patrick Deneen. Why Liberalism Failed. (New Haven, CN: Yale University Press, 2018) at pg 141.
130 Patrick Deneen. Why Liberalism Failed. (New Haven, CN: Yale University Press, 2018) at pg 196.                                      - 131 -an emphasis on moral equality. What Deneen wants is more experimentation with local practices oriented around producing new cultures, which may contribute to the reemergence of the classical ideal of the civic polis. This echoes the experimentalism stressed by Hazony, though it is unclear whether Deneen believes the national level would be appropriate to his claims. It is also a consistently conservative solution, rejecting any attempt at a rationalizing effort which can solve all the problems of postmodernity at one stroke. It retains an Oakeshottian131 resistance to anything which reeks of bigness and scale, putting a lot more faith in localism, and by extension traditionalist particularism.
What unites Deneen’s criticisms with Hazony’s is this shared suspicion of bigness. Deneen just happens to go further. Hazony is comfortable with political organization at the national level, even calling for reforms along the lines of a conservative democracy. By contrast Deneen is suspicious even of the kind of state institutions which would be required to maintain a nationalist polity. Deeper than this thought is the desire for belonging and meaning in a seemingly technocratic and atomized world. When Deneen discusses the need to build “practices that sustain culture within communities”132 and Hazony talks about a shared people we commit ourselves to, their fundamental concern is in some respects the sense of loneliness faced by modern people. Like all political positions which draw on such forceful affects, this can lead to dangerous calls. For instance, in his article “Conservative Rationalism Has Failed” Hazony makes the shocking argument that authenticity in individual religious belief can be subordinated to the communal need for all members to participate in the affirmation of a shared faith tradition. Here I will quote Hazony at length.
The same kind of question arises with respect to the commitments of conservatives in their personal lives. Consider the custom of setting aside a sabbath day and going to church (or to synagogue). I often speak to young men and women who say they are excited about “conservatism.” Yet when the sabbath comes around, they have not the slightest intention of keeping
131 See Michael Oakeshott. Rationalism in Politics and Other Essays: New And Expanded Edition. (Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Press, 1991) and Michael Oakeshott. The Politics of Faith and the Politics of Skepticism. (New Haven, CN: Yale University Press, 1996).
132 Patrick Deneen. Why Liberalism Failed. (New Haven, CN: Yale University Press, 2018) at pg 192.
                                      - 132 -
the sabbath as their ancestors did for two or three thousand years, but happily tell me that they are headed for the mountains or the beach, or staying home “to finish up something for work.” No doubt, many of these are atheists or agnostics, and this is perhaps not their own fault. But this absolves them of nothing. If they were conservatives, they would not simply shrug their shoulders and go off to the beach, saying, “Oh well, too bad I’m an atheist.” A conservative says in his heart: My entire country is suffering terribly from having cut off its traditions at the roots. What can I do to revive these traditions, to make myself a more conservative person, to give honor to the ideas and way of life of my ancestors who brought me here (or of the nation that adopted me)? And is it not, perhaps, my own fault too that I know nothing of God, having given up the search for the wisdom and understanding of my ancestors as an adolescent? Perhaps it is my own fault, after all, if I seek to exercise my freedom by going to the seashore on the seventh day, rather than setting it aside as my ancestors did, as a day for reconnecting myself to the traditions of my nation and its God.133
What makes this position post-modern isn’t just its rejection of uni-versalistic liberal individualism and its skepticism towards reason. It is the distinct demand that even the expressivist ethic underpinning romanticism which stressed the authenticity of the single individual can be ignored for the sake of maintaining the stability of our collective identity. Its nostalgia is deeply tinged with a Biblical sense of loss and fall. Stability can only be restored through the demand that the deepest inclinations of the individual human soul, such as our relationship to God, play second fiddle to the need to establish an irrationally justified discourse as a disciplinary power over society. It is disciplinary because even conservatives who do not believe in Hazony’s project are to silence their inner objections and get on board for the sake of the community. It is not hard to see this as moving backwards to a pre-liberal period, something Deneen himself warns we should not do.134 But even in Deneen’s case it is hard to break the sense that his illiberal experimentalism and establishment of a variety of different communities, where individuals are not necessarily guaranteed the protections offered by l iberal law,
133 Yoram Hazony. “Conservative Rationalism Has Failed.” The American Mind, June 24th 2019.
134 Patrick Deneen. Why Liberalism Failed. (New Haven, CN: Yale University Press, 2018) at pg 184.                                      - 133 -would lead to some very questionable outcomes. The impetus of liberalism to treat everyone as moral equals would risk being eschewed by the communitarian desire to treat those like us as better, or at least more equal than others.
In many respects, despite being a product of post-modernity these reactionary critics are of course very much aligned with the conservative commentators discussed earlier. They are either lukewarm or directly hostile to the use of reason, invoking skepticism towards its epistemic authority where needed. But this skepticism is largely strategic, since they are willing to show faith towards truth and normative claims backed up by particularism—at least where they find it admirable. One of the final and most obvious rebuttals one can make is Waldron’s, which is that liberalism simply has to claim to be the particular product of a given culture— one which takes its particular outlook to be universal.135 Alternately liberals can just adopt the Rortyian ironist outlook towards their own positions discussed earlier.136 In either case I do not find the post-modern conservative denunciations of liberalism convincing, and I especially am not convinced that liberalism has failed—much as they may wish it has. If we are to surpass the limitations of liberalism, it will very much be through radicalizing its promises rather than retreating backwards into the proverbial Weberian churches.137 It is to this problem that I will shortly turn.
Conclusion
Since its inception liberalism has faced criticism from all quadrants of the political compass. Rousseau criticized early liberals for their emphasis on self-interestedness and crass commercialism, putting forward a controversial argument that we should instead unite a democratic polity
135 Jeremy Waldron. Liberal Rights: Collected Papers 1981—1991 (United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press, 1993).
136 Richard Rorty. Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1989).
137 Max Weber. The Vocation Lectures, trans. Tracy B. Strong. (Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing, 2004).
                                      - 134 -
subordinated to the general will. Burke’s opinion of liberalism varied. He was content to accept or even embrace it where liberal rights seemed to flow from a particular culture and posed little threat to effective hierarchies. But Burke had little time for abstract ruminations about the “rights of man” where those threatened to rationalize society and upend the established order.
In the nineteenth century Marxism emerged as perhaps the most dangerous threat to liberalism in its long history. Marx and his followers weren’t so much hostile to the emancipatory ambitions of the liberal tradition as they felt it did not go far enough. The mere grant of formal rights was of little use to alienated subjects of modern capitalism. What was really needed was revolutionary change to bring about a classless society. Marxists also pointed the finger at liberal law for offering shallow promises of equality and dignity while truly servicing the interests of capital.
As the Romantic era gave way to the long twentieth century, liberalism faced an early crisis, where post-colonial and anti-imperial critics—back by significant military force—criticized liberal universalism for its role in promoting war and imperialism. The Leninist critique and its varied offshoots influenced generations of critical thinkers to see the promise of human rights and freedom as little more than a fig leaf to promote Western values and interests in the victimized parts of the world. On the other end of the spectrum, fascist commentators like Carl Schmitt argued that liberalism was ultimately a hypocritical effort to transcend the existential dimensions of politics through law and rights. Far better to accept a dictatorial leader who could truly unite and speak for the people, while excluding all others who didn’t belong.
With the defeat of Nazism in 1945 and the discrediting of Soviet positions, critical legal theorists began to develop new arguments against the limitations of liberalism. Roberto Unger proposed recognizing the contradictory elements of liberal psychology and practice, and instead embracing a kind of super-liberal outlook emphasizing creativity and the overcoming of false necessity. Pierre Schlag argued that justifications for liberal legalism were ultimately circular and doomed to fall apart, justifying a turn to post-modern skepticism of reason.                                      - 135 -Later, this grand theorizing fell by the wayside of militant particularism. Racialized minorities, feminist theorists and many others came to criticize the ambitions of earlier critics of liberalism to develop a wholesale replacement for the status quo. Instead we needed to recognize the intersectional ways the liberal law operated, and how rights served to benefit some at the expense of others.
Finally post-modern conservative critics like Yoram Hazony and Patrick Deneen emerged to argue for more reactionary forms of particularism. They were also keen to criticize liberal universalism and its effacement of difference. But they had little interest in embracing the wholesale skepticism which often defined militant particularism. Instead they called for the restoration of a politics of faith which would entrench tradition and localism at the heart of our lives.
There are few commonalities between all these different positions. Some wanted to put the brakes on liberalism, or even move back in time wholesale. Others felt that the promise of complete emancipation offered by liberals was yet to be fulfilled. Many critics put forward highly particu-larist arguments, condemning liberalism for its pretentious universalism and desire to govern the entire globe. And then there were those who claimed liberalism was not universal enough. Its guarantees were selectively realized, with huge swathes of people being denied the “right to have rights.” Critiques of liberalism were in many ways demands that it live up to its own aspirations. In the Chapter that follows I will offer my own criticisms of liberal society, drawing on the best arguments highlighted above. My own solution will be to radicalize what is best in the liberal tradition with the ambition of establishing a more participatory and equal society where the dignity of all is amplified.

 3
The Limitations of Liberalism and Liberal Rights
The Limits of Classical Liberalism and the Egalitarian Reorientation
In the last chapter I discussed a number of critical theories and how they approached liberalism as an inegalitarian and hegemonic tradition which imposed serious and unjustified limitations on people. Some of these objections were framed in the language of rights, with critics contending liberalism was inconsistent in its extension of equal rights to all. It often prevented racialized minorities, women, and LGBTQ individuals from enjoying the same right, or at least enjoying them to the same degree. Other critics objected to rights discourse as well, claiming the whole of liberalism needed to be thrown out. A few cosmetic fixes weren’t going to cut it. What I did not discuss were the serious efforts of liberals to counter these objections through a variety of theoretical and practical tricks. Some of these were quite profound, and provide serious lessons even to those of us who insist we need to think our way past liberalism. I will discuss some of these developments here, along with what can be taken away from them.                                      - 137 -M. McManus, A Critical Legal Examination of Liberalism and Liberal Rights, Palgrave Studies in Classical Liberalism, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61025'8_3
                                      - 138 -
Far and away the most important liberal egalitarian was John Rawls. While there are countless “radical” critiques of Rawls out there, all objecting that in some respect he does not go far enough, I think it is fair to say that he goes pretty damn far in correcting for earlier oversights in the tradition. At the core of Rawls’ thinking is a radicalized Kantian argument concerning the partiality of our considered convictions. Where Kant tended to focus on barriers to the proper function of our transcendental reason, Rawls was concerned to give Kantianism as more distinctively empirical twist.1 The consequence is a far greater sensitivity to the way material and social factors impact our sense of self, values, and thoughts on the nature of justice.
The broad contours of Rawls’ arguments are well known so I will only discuss them briefly here before mentioning their impact on the broader development of liberal egalitarianism. Rawls claims that A Theory of Justice is going to provide a new interpretation of the contractarian argument, carried to a higher level of sophistication, to provide a systematic political theory which will serve as an alternative to the then dominant tradition of utilitarianism. Rawls makes a number of objections to the utilitarian position, perhaps the most innovative being that it fails to differentiate carefully enough between persons. To the utilitarian, each individual is important only in so much as their preferences can be aggregated into calculations of overall utility. Rawls believes we would not commit ourselves to such a system since we are fundamentally self-interested actors.2 This does not necessarily mean selfish in the libertarian sense; rather we are committed to the pursuit of our own life plans and would not readily sacrifice them for the sake of utility maximization overall. Given this, we cannot rely on utilitarianism and other forms of a posteriori theorizing to develop a cogent theory of justice since self-interested actors often have mutually contradictory goals in practice. But we cannot turn to strictly Kantian deontological reason either, since the kind of disinterested moral agents postulated by the Prussian Pietist seemed too remote from our empirical reading of human beings. The problem then
1 John Rawls. A Theory of Justice: Revised Edition. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999) at pg 221.
2 John Rawls. A Theory of Justice: Revised Edition. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999) at pgs 139-144.
                                      - 139 -becomes to develop a form of a priori reasoning which captures the disinterested quality of Kantian deontology without sacrificing a more grounded vision of human beings as self-interested actors.
This is where Rawls’ fascinating thought experiment of the original position enters. He asks us to imagine a hypothetical scenario where individuals existed as self-interested beings with a firm understanding of basic facts about economics, human psychology and politics but no knowledge of the personal attributes of their identity. He characterizes these individuals as behind a “veil of ignorance.”3 Rawls than asks us to image which principles of justice such individuals would choose, knowing that once the veil was lifted they would enter a society whose basic structure would be ordered by the principles chosen in the original positions. He contends that this thought experiment is helpful in abstracting away from many of the partial variables which frequently corrupt our moral reasoning. At the end of %eory Rawls argues that reasoning as though from the original position constitutes a form of purity of heart. We can therefore take the principles of justice chosen as more plausible than competing schemes.
Rawls argues that what he calls justice as fairness would be chosen over competing schemes such as utilitarianism, strict egalitarianism, or perfectionism. Justice as fairness holds that reasoners behind the veil of ignorance in the original position would choose two principles of justice, ranked in lexical order. The first would be reasoners would want the most extensive scheme of basic liberties compatible with a similar system of liberties for all. And the second is that social and economic inequalities are to be to the greatest benefit of the least advantaged, consistent with the just fairness principle and attached to offices and positions open to all under conditions of fair equality of opportunity. 'tte first principle is far and away the less controversial of the two, though it attracted formidable criticisms as well.4 Later Rawls reinterprets its function in his later work
3 arguments for the veil of ignorance are presented in their most refined form in John Rawls.
Justice as Fairness: A Restatement. (Cambridge, MA. The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2001) at pgs 85-89.
4 In particular see H.L.A Hart. “Rawls on Liberty and its Priority.” University of Chicago Law Review, Volume 40, 1973 on the problems with adjudicating limitations on liberty without appealing to the principle of utility.
                                      - 140 -
on political liberalism so the principle of liberty takes on a different role enabling toleration in a pluralistic society. While interesting I will not directly take up the debate on this here.5 'tte more controversial principle is undoubtedly the second, which warrants serious analysis.
Rawls is not the first liberal theorist to stress the importance of looking after the least well off, but his second principle is given a weight and analytical rigor which was rare in the tradition. Saying that, there are many different ways the principle might be interpreted-some bleeding-heart libertarians even contend a consistent application of Rawls’s argument requires a minimal state since that will be best for the poor amongst us. However Rawls himself appeared skeptical of such efforts to reinterpret his egalitarian emphasis on the least well off in such a pro-capitalist manner. Particularly by his final work Justice as Fairness: A Restatement Rawls seems to have concluded some form of liberal socialism or a property-owning democracy was the right approach to realizing the second princi-ple.6 'ttis would of course be damning for many purportedly neoliberal societies defined by mass inequality, since it would suggest they are not living up to their highest ideals if they are indeed committed to liberalism. Naturally such a contentious claim requires substantial arguments to back it up, and indeed Rawls spent much of the remainder of his academic life refining his points on the second principle.
As Sandel observes7 there are two main prongs to Rawls multifaceted arguments for the second principle. The first is an argument about what self-interested actors would choose behind the veil of ignorance. Rawls’ contention is that in the original position no one would know whether they were an individual with certain advantages or disadvantages, for instance being an educated businessman or a racialized woman in Detroit. Consequently no rational individual would take the chance of choosing principles which might generate intense material disparities between these two individuals. Particularly if, as now, resources and honors were so unequally distributed that our potential to pursue life-plans and enjoy
5 John Rawls. Political Liberalism (New York, NY: Columbia University Press, 1993).
6 For an interesting interpretation of this claim see William Edmundson. John Rawls: Reticent Socialist. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2017).
7 See Michael Sandel. Justice: What's the Right 7Thing to Do? (New York: Farrar, Straus and
Giroux, 2009).
                                      - 141 -comparable bases of self-respect would be serious compromised if disadvantaged. This is a powerful claim in part because a society organized by principles conducive to high degrees of inequality is one where the considerable or even vast majority will end up in less privileged positions. A reasoner behind the veil of ignorance would have bad odds of winding up at the top of the pecking order. However, some critics have pointed out that this presumes a degree of caution in individuals which may be untrue; perhaps impartial reasoners may none the less be gamblers. This argument can be refuted in part by appealing to works of political psychology stressing the risk aversion of most of us. If it were true that most of us are fundamentally risk averse that would give empirical credibility to Rawls claim that impartial reasoners behind the veil would act cautiously to ensure they did not wind up seriously disadvantaged once it was lifted.
Rawls second argument is more straightforwardly moral. Personally I find it extraordinarily powerful, though in many disturbing ways when one considers the consequences of extending such reasoning to all dimensions of personal responsibility. Rawls argues that we need to recognize how the distribution of resources and honors in communities is determined largely be morally arbitrary reasons. I typically divide this into three dimensions for the sake of clarity in exposition, though his own presentation is less structured. Firstly, Rawls contends that many individuals fall behind because they lack sufficient natural talents; whether one considers intelligence, physical aptitude, beauty and so on. However, the distribution of natural talents is effectively determined by a genetic lottery rather than any admirable moral qualities of the individual. The same is true of the socio-economic disadvantages which emerge from being a part of a historically discriminated group or an endemically poor family. Given the consistent evidence which portrays the generational disadvantages which accrue as a result of such intersectional forms of marginalization, we cannot say that these disadvantages are largely the result of personal failings. And finally, the natural talents and ultimately refined skills which a society rewards also seems to have little to do with their actual merit. It is easy to point to many examples: consider that the average salary of an American nurse is around $73,550 while many successful professional athletes may make hundreds of millions a year. Or
                                      - 142 -
figures who produce works of aesthetic excellence which challenge the public and go ignored within their lifetime, while the myriad products of the culture industry bring tremendous profits to their purveyors. In these instances it seems clear that market societies are not actually rewarding intrinsically valuable work, but rather contributions which command high returns based on marketing and consumer demand. Consequently we cannot even say that talent is determinative of success, since many valuable talents are not worth much given the arbitrary nature of taste and desire. Taken together the three dimensions of moral arbitrariness reveal the emptiness of arguments about meritocracy within capitalist societies. But if it turns out that resources and honors aren’t distributed in a morally arbitrary manner, we should ask why one might have any commitment to retaining such a system rather than one which was fairer. As Rawls puts it:
Thus it is incorrect that individuals with greater natural endowments and the superior character that has made their development possible have a right to a cooperative scheme that enables them to obtain even further benefits in ways that do not contribute to the advantages of others. We do not deserve our place in the distribution of native endowments, any more than we deserve our initial starting place in society. That we deserve the superior character that enables us to make the effort to cultivate our abilities is also problematic; for such character depends in good part upon fortunate family and social circumstances in early life for which we can claim no credit. The notion of desert does not apply here8
This does not mean, as critics like Nozick occasionally implied, that Rawls argued that individuals have no entitlement to the fruits of their natural talents or efforts.9 This is in part because exercising our talents can be a crucial element of exercising our life plans and developing a firm basis of self-respect. Encouraging the exercise of our natural talents through economic incentivization is also important in generating growth
8 John Rawls. A Theory of Justice: Revised Edition. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999) at pg 89.
9 See in particular his discussion of patterned theories of distributive justice in Robert Nozick. Anarchy, State, and Utopia. (New York, NY: Basic Books, 1974) at pg 168.
                                      - 143 -which will ultimately benefit all, including the least fortunate. Rawls’ simple point is that any resources and honors we receive must demonstrably be to the benefit of the least well off, which would seem to put an upper limit on how many can accrue to one individual or class before there is significant more pressure to distribute them in a more equitable manner.
In Rawls’ later work on political liberalism, he backs away from some of the more metaphysically stringent elements of justice as fairness. He now argues that the broadly Kantian but relatively thin ideal of the good life presented in Theory is problematic, as it committed Rawls to presenting justice as fairness as a comprehensive liberalism. Partly under pressure of critiques by various deliberative democrats and communitarians, Rawls10 wanted to reframe the parameters of our understanding through an examination of political liberalism in a public context. He now contends that the account of self-interested rationality presented in Theory is insufficiently universal, committing those with different conceptions of the self and the good life to a vision alien to their outlooks. Instead we need to adopt the perspective of a “reasonable” person who is willing to tolerate competing conceptions at both the theoretical and political levels. If taken seriously Rawls argues such reasonable individuals would commit themselves to the principles of political liberalism, the basic principles and structure of which would be subject to an “overlapping consensus.”11 In the forum of public reason, different individuals and groups governed by political liberalism would deliberate on what was needed to live the good life. But they would not try to fundamentally alter the basic structure of society, recognizing that political liberalism allowed the broadest sphere for toleration and cooperation necessary in increasingly pluralistic societies. Some would contend that this is an insufficiently firm basis to hold society together, since there is a lack of any shared commitment to a way of life and principles-Deneen seems to hold this position for example.12 But Rawls argues that over time political
10 See Michael Sandel. Liberalism and the Limits of Justice: Second Edition. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1998).
11 See John Rawls. Justice as Fairness: A Restatement. (Cambridge, MA. The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2001) at pg 192—193.
12 Patrick Deneen. Why Liberalism Failed. (New Haven, CN: Yale University Press, 2018).
                                      - 144 -
liberalism would cease to be a mere modus vivendi and would become accepted and embraced by the subjects of liberal rule.13 The same might even be true at the international level over a long enough period, as liberal and decent hierarchical peoples cooperate to establish perpetual peace while putting gentle pressure on outlaw states and benevolent absolutisms to reform.14
Rawls influenced a generation of egalitarians to challenge much of the conventional wisdom surrounding liberal theory. Most of these authors acknowledged a direct debt to Rawls’ pioneering efforts, though each took issue with a substantial element of Rawlsian theory. Some, like Scanlon and Parfit, found the argument for neo-contractualism and its impartiality and methodological rigor while rejecting much of justice as fairness.15 Others leaned more heavily on Rawls’ egalitarian interpretation of liberalism but took issue with many of the details; Dworkin insisted we shouldn’t shy away from presenting a comprehensive vision of the liberal good life,16 Sen and Nussbaum (rightly) criticized Rawlsian transcendental institutionalism and emphasis on resources and honors over capabilities,17 and Nagel updated the Sidgwickian insistence that there was a more serious tension between the self-interested nature of freedom and our impartial concern with equality than Rawls admitted.18 But each of these figures essentially elaborated on Rawlsian themes in their work, developing a convincing case that far from being hostile to egalitarianism, the liberal principle of moral equality demanded serious efforts to establish equality in practice. This position was well articulated by Ronald Dworkin in Sovereign Virtue:
13 John Rawls. Justice as Fairness: A Restatement. (Cambridge, MA. The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2001) at pgs 192—193.
14 See John Rawls. The Law of Peoples: With the “Idea of Public Reason Revisited. ” (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2001).
15 See TM Scanlon. What We Owe Each Other: Revised Edition. (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2000) and Derek Parfit. On What Matters: Volume One. (Oxford, United Kingdom. Oxford University Press, 2013).
16 See Ronald Dworkin. “Rawls and the Law.” Fordham Law Review, Volume 72, 2004 and.
17 See Amartya Sen. The Idea of Justice. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009) and Martha Nussbaum. Frontiers of Justice: Disability, Nationality, Species Membership. (Massachusetts: Belknap Press, 2006).
18 See Thomas Nagel. Equality and Partiality. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1991).
                                      - 145 -There is a difference between treating people equally, with respect to one or another commodity or opportunity, and treating them as equals. Someone who argues that people should be more equal in income claims that a community that achieves equality of income is one that really treats people as equals. Someone who urges that people should instead be equally happy offers a different and competing theory about what society deserves that title. The question is then: which of the many different theories of that sort is the best theory?19
And of course Dworkin goes on to argue that his is in fact the best theory; as does every liberal egalitarian. I believe that Sen and Nussbaum actually offer the best theory of equality, for reasons I will articulate shortly. But before we get into that I wish to pause and acknowledge how liberal egalitarianism quite decisively dealt with one of the major historical criticisms which hounded liberalism as a whole. By linking the liberal tradition to not just positive liberty or formal freedom, but real material concerns for injustice, they took a serious step forward in bucking many of the left-wing critiques which undermined the tradition for century. In many ways they improved upon these left critiques by raising them to a higher level of analytical rigor and precision than what had been seen previously. Accounts of distributive justice in the socialist tradition were very frequently focused on institutional fixes to structural injustice. While critical to establishing a more egalitarian society, there was often considerable vagueness about the philosophical arguments for precise principles of distributive justice. 'tte brevity of Marx’s comments criticizing crude equality and espousing the principle “from each according to his ability, to each according to his needs” in the pamphlet length “Critique of the Gotha Program” is indicatory.20 Shortly, I will draw on liberal egalitarian position while arguing for my own second right to equality of capabilities, demonstrating how I think a critical theory can learn much from these figures.
19 See Ronald Dworkin. Sovereign Virtue: 7The 7Theory and Practice of Equality. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002) at pg 11.
20 Marx, Karl. “Critique of the Gotha Program.” May, 1875. Available at https://www.marxists.org/ archive/marx/works/1875/gotha/index.htm.
                                      - 146 -
A Critical Legal Argument Against Liberal Property Rights
I have already discussed the liberal arguments for property rights at great length in the preceding chapters, as well as many of the objections to them. Hopefully by this point there is no need to repeat the claims here. Instead I will outline my own position on the nature of property from a critical legal perspective, and why we are entitled to treat resources and honors as subjects for distribution by properly democratic political authorities. This will in turn link up to my argument the individuals should enjoy a right to equality of expressive capabilities except where subject to certain constraints.
One of the first things to point out is that the argument for vast disparities in property can very quickly assume a strangely illiberal character. This is in part because the basic principle of liberalism, defined by thinkers from the authors of the Declaration of the Independence through Kant and Will Kymlicka, is that all individuals are moral equals.21 While imperfectly applied in practice, this outlook has grown exponentially more powerful as history has proceeded and we have gradually expanded the circle of concern to previous ostracized groups. The principle that people are moral equals flows from the intuition that, while people may contribute greater or less value to the world over the course of their lives-or even waste them in foolish hatred-, each person’s life is of integral value to them. Given that liberalism holds that we must treat all individuals are moral equals, it in fact leads us to the Cohenian conclusion that-contra Locke and others-deviations from material quality actually prove quite problematic. They cannot be naturalized through appeals to lobster hierarchies and distinctions of rank or worth,22 as many defenders of
21 See Will Kymlicka. “Multiculturalism’s Moral Impulse.” Carnegie Council for Ethics in International Affairs. November 25th 2014. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2W 689QD849Y&t=118s.
22 Anticipating what comes later, it is worth noting that the eminent political and legal philosopher Jeremy Waldron has also written an interesting work on the expansion of our ideas about moral equality and the spread of liberal ideas. This pertains particularly to the language of human dignity, which Waldron argues originated as a term of reverence to those of high status. Gradually speaking it has come to assume a more egalitarian role to refer to all human beings as individuals of equal status. I believe that Waldron’s history, while informative and related to my discussion, misses the
                                      - 147 -i nequality seem to contend.23 It is departures from equality, not departures from inequality, which require justification from a moral point of view. At least if one is a liberal who takes the matter seriously. And I think this applies even more for positions, such as my own, which accept this liberal orientation but contend that it needs to be taken more seriously than classical liberalism has accepted. Given this it must be asked whether property rights can be justified as a departure from equality. I think the answer is yes, but not nearly to the extent many classical liberals presumed. There are two main defenses of such departures from equality given: Lockean style moral arguments about entitlement to value, and consequentialist claims about the negative implications of engaging in dramatic redistributive efforts.
Lockean style contentions about such departures being justified along the lines of the labor theory of value and entitlement, often tied to meritocratic claims about the persons who created the value deserving it, were dealt a devastating blow by arguments from Marx through to Rawls which pointed to severe flaws in such reasoning. Firstly if the contention of Lockean defenders of property rights is that those who committed the labor should get the reward then our society would look dramatically different. Since it is the workers who almost always do most of the actual work, and the bosses contribute relatively little, then it follows that there should be a massive redistribution of wealth from capital to labor. Some have tried to rebut this by appealing not to the volume or time of labor committed-which itself deviates very pronouncedly from the Lockean paradigm-but instead to the qualitative contribution made. But this is highly problematic since, as Rawls points out, our capacity to make qualitatively meaningful contributions is very much determined by morally arbitrary factors in life for which we can take little personal credit. Even
particularly Catholic origins of dignity stressed by figures like Samuel Moyn. In its Christian origins the term actually had some of the more egalitarian connotations Waldron associated with the advent of liberalism. After all each human was crafted to be an equal in the eyes of God. See Jeremy Waldron. Dignity, Rank, and Rights: 7The Tanner Lectures on Human Value. Delivered at UC Berkeley, April 21—23, (2009) and Samuel Moyn. “The Secret History of Constitutional Dignity.” Yale Human Rights and Development Journal, 17, (2014).
23 For a contemporary defense of such inequalities which has proven quite popular see Jordan Peterson. 12 Rules to Life: An Antidote to Chaos. (Toronto, ON: Random House Canada, 2018) at pgs 5-7.
                                      - 148 -
the superior character which led some to become doctors and others with equal abilities to become janitors may very well flow from fortunate circumstances which neither individual was responsible for.
The most convincing rebuttal to this position comes from Robert Nozick in his great work Anarchy, State and Utopia.1'1 'tte book famously opens with the-unargued- assertion that people have rights which cannot be violated. 'tte most important of these is the Lockean/Kantian right to liberty, which Nozick interprets as being systematically protected from interference by any and all others. These rights exist prior to the state, and therefore cannot be abnegated even for socially useful purposes. After describing how a minimal state could none the less legitimately form in such conditions and developing a very interesting critique of utilitarianism, Nozick goes on to discuss property rights. According to Nozick ownership-or justice in holdings-is determined by historical acquisitions rather than according to any patterned theory of distributive justice. 'ttis is because, since the natural rights of individuals are determinative of the parameters of right actions, they key question to ask is whether they were adequately respected in a historical process of acquisitions. In this case Nozick claims ascertaining whether the acquisition of a holding was just is determined by a three-step process. Firstly, was the holding acquired without coercively violating any else’s natural rights? Secondly, if the holding is being transferred from one person to another, is this being conducted in a non-coercive manner? And thirdly, am I free of obligations to redistribute the holding in my possession to compensate for some past injustice? If the answer is yes to all questions, then I am entitled to keep the holding.
Note that the genius of this approach is that it is not obviously subject to the objections of moral arbitrariness raised by figures like Rawls, whose main target is meritocratic theories of dessert. On the surface Nozick’s account of justice in holdings is neutral on questions of who deserves what. What it claims is that individuals are entitled to their holdings so long as they acquired or transferred them in a rights-respecting manner and are not obligated to compensate others for past injustices. Beyond that whether an individual deserves this or that is a non-issue. Indeed one
24 See Robert Nozick. Anarchy, State, and Utopia. (New York, NY: Basic Books, 1974).
                                      - 149 -of the critiques of patterned theories of distributive justice Nozick makes is there is a presumption that a more knowing individual, backed by state power, is in a position to make determinations about who should get what according to their particular moral outlook. The fundamental problem with a patterned theory of distributive justice is it rests upon an implicit assumption that it is permissible to violate the liberty rights of individuals in order to establish what the Rawlsian or Marxist philosopher considers to be the best end state. But allowing people to be free will inevitably disrupt such patterns, as demonstrated vividly by Nozick’s “Wilt Chamberlain” thought experiment. Framed in its most powerful form, the thought experiment asks us to consider a scenario where holdings were distributed in a fully egalitarian fashion-perhaps something akin to Poland in 1989. A talented basketball player-Nozick refers to the American Wilt Chamberlain- places a box in front of an auditorium requesting a small stipend in order to play. Since there are many sports aficionados in the city, they happily pay to see Chamberlain play, and he very quickly becomes rich. In this case the liberty of actors, in this Chamberlain and his devoted fans, disrupted the initially equal pattern. But this in no way implies that any wrong-doing was conducted. If anything, everyone got the expected bang for their buck.25
Nozick’s argument is a brilliant reinterpretation of the Lockean-Kantian tradition of property rights which confirms him as one of the most interesting political philosophers of the twentieth century (taken too soon). None the less I think it is fundamentally flawed in very deep ways. The most obvious is the aforementioned problem with merely asserting the existence of rights, and then placing such immense weight on an assertion to carry an entire theory of distributive justice and ultimately politics as a whole. A second fundamental difficulty, frequently observed, is that Nozick’s is ultimately a single principle theory.26 Much as he relies on an assertion about the existence of pre-legal rights, Nozick places an equally immense weight in the idea that liberty-conceived as non-interference-is all that matters. This is by no means obvious to me,
25 Robert Nozick. Anarchy, State, and Utopia. (New York, NY: Basic Books, 1974) at pgs 161—163.
26 Paul Graham makes this objection in his discussion of the Rawls-Nozick debate. See Paul Graham. Rawls: A Beginniner's Guide. (Oxford, UK: Oneworld Publishers, 2007) at pg 66—70.
                                      - 150 -
and seems extremely vulnerable to Rawlsian objections about what actually impartial reasoners would prefer to select as principles. It seems unlikely that such reasoners-whether behind the veil of ignorance or adopting a more Scanlonian form of contractualism -would decide to grant simple non-interference the absolute weight given to it by Nozick. Finally and most importantly, I think that Nozick’s approach demonstrates the limitations of ideal theory for reasoning about distributive justice; a problem he himself seems to acknowledge circa his footnote on the need for considerable redistributions of holding to compensate for a long history of injustice and exploitation.27 Nozick never fully takes on the Marxist objection that conceiving of property, rights, and the history of acquisitions in an ahistorical sense irrevocably involves idealizing them to such an extent that they exist as ideological abstractions from the material world. This applies at every level of his analysis. The assertion that rights just exist follows naturally from these idealizations, since to a certain extent they are necessary postulates to get the entire system going. Once one insists that we not just take a very particular conception of natural rights to be a given, one is lead to two conclusions. Either one requires some justificatory theory ala Rawls to defend the conception, which leads to the issue of whether most rational actors would decide on such a stringent vision of property rights,28 or one is led to the (largely but by no means exclusively Marxist) point that liberal rights historically emerged and were codified within law to protect the interest of the wealthy and powerful. In this respect the historical theorizing on and protection of property rights was not only highly contingent, and hence unnatural. It also depended on the force of law and ultimately violence to back up its legitimacy claims, which runs very counter to Nozick’s own positions
27 While he argues that adopting socialism as “punishment for our sins” would be going too far, some extensive efforts would be needed to even talk about establishing a just minimal state. See Robert Nozick. Anarchy, State, and Utopia. (New York, NY: Basic Books, 1974) at pg 231.
28 Later in his career Nozick seems to have budged slightly on this point in his arguments about the symbolic importance of democracy as a source of political legitimacy. This led some to claim that he had abandoned libertarianism wholesale; a position Nozick disputed in a later interview. Whatever the truth is it seems if nothing else that his position on such matters did not remain stable. See Robert Nozick. “The Zigzag of Politics” in The Examined Life: Philosophical Meditations. (New York, NY: Simon and Schuster, 1989) and Robert Nozick and Julian Sanchez. “Robert Nozick’s Final Interview.” Libertarianism.Org, July 26th 2001. https://www.libertarianism.org/ publications/essays/robert-nozicks-final-interview.
                                      - 151 -concerning the use of coercion.29 Given this the argument for natural rights to property seems to either collapse into a mere assertion, or it needs to be defended as but one more transhistorical scheme amongst many which runs very contrary to the actual goings on of the world history where people piously invoked their “rights” to exploit and colonize others.
Given this I do not think that even the strongest Lockean style arguments for property rights can stand. The most basic reason for this is my belief that a system of rights should not be connoted as natural, and as such placed beyond criticism in an authoritarian manner. It is long past time we abandon the transcendent appeal to rights as ways to settle moral arguments, in part because-following Derek Parfit-it is far more constructive to ask why and which rights matter. The same is true when discussing liberty as Nozick defines it. When we ask why freedom is important, we do not simply inquire into whether a person is uncoerced or not. We ask what they are actually capable of doing with that freedom and the dignity this gives to their life conceived as a total project. In the next Chapter I will argue that conceived in this way we would want a set of rights that generates the most substantive freedom for ourselves to enjoy an existence of dignified self-authorship.
The consequentialist argument for strict property rights is more convincing. Part of the power of modern consequentialist arguments for property articulated by figures such as F.A Hayek in The Constitution of Liberty and other works is they often synthesize a liberal emphasis on freedom in the economic sphere with hard edged consequentialist arguments for the material benefits of respecting property rights and unleashing capitalism’s potential. This is sometimes provocatively referred to as a
29 Nozick appeared sensitive to these worries, which explains the long but rather bizarre section on how the minimal state could theoretically come about in an uncoercive manner at the start of Anarchy, State, and Utopia. He argues that in an anarchic state we might gradually grant “different agencies” the authority to resolve disputes and even to use minimal violence for the protection of property. Through a competitive process of clamoring for clients a dominant protective association might be formed which de facto comes to operate as a minimal state as though through an “invisible hand.” While of modest interest, such a hypothetical scenario is of course no answer to the fact that states as they exist now certainly were not formed in this manner. This is perhaps why Nozick concedes on the need to compensate for past historical injustices. See Robert Nozick. Anarchy, State, and Utopia. (New York, NY: Basic Books, 1974) at pgs 108—110.
                                      - 152 -
kind of Kantian consequentialism.30 The argument is essentially that respecting property rights, and by extension economic freedom, is the only way to incentivize strident economic efforts which will ultimately maximize overall welfare. In the case of “bleeding heart libertarians” such as Jason Brennan, they even make the Rawlsian case that this may very well turn out to maximally benefit the least well off in the medium to long run if combined with a few minimal policy adjustments.31 If true, the egalitarian argument would be stripped from its association with improving the welfare of the needy and become a mere call for equality for its own sake. As Frankfurt points out, inequality so disconnected from welfare isn’t that appealing.32 Sharing equal misery with others isn’t a future most of us want. As Margaret Thatcher once put it, responding to criticisms that inequality was rising under her neoliberal policies:
All levels of income are better off than they were in 1979. But what the honorable member is saying is that he would rather the poor were poorer provided the rich were less rich. That way you will never create the wealth for better social services as we have. And what a policy. Yes. He would rather have the poor poorer provided the rich were less rich. That is the Liberal policy. Yes it came out. He didn’t intend it to but it did. I think the honorable gentlemen knows that I have the same contempt for his Socialist policies as the people of East Europe who have experienced it I think I must have hit the right nail on the head when I pointed out that the logic of those policies are they’d rather have the poor poorer. Once they start to talk about the gap, they’d rather the gap [be lower]. Not up here. But [lower]33
The problem with these allegedly consequentialist calls is that their consequentialism starts to look extremely thin very quickly. One doesn’t have to be Peter Singer to note that the vast inequities of wealth and power which exist cannot be linked to any stringent form of utility
30 See John Gray. Hayek on Liberty: Third Edition. (London, UK: Routledge, 1998).
31 See Jason Brennan. Libertarianism: What Everyone Needs to Know. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2012).
32 See Harry. G. Frankfurt. On Inequality. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2015).
33 Margaret Thatcher. “Confidence in Her Majesty’s Government Speech.” Margaret Thatcher Foundation. November 22nd 1990. https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/108256.
                                      - 153 -maximization; it stretches the idea of consequentialism past breaking point and into parody to suggest that Jeff Bezos must keep his $130 billion fortune for the sake of incentivizing others to engage in economically valuable activity, despite that being sufficient wealth to pay for roughly 13 billion malaria vaccinations at 10 dollars a pop. 'ttis reflects the insight of Bernard Williams that utilitarianism, and we might say now conse-quentialism generally, becomes so keen on justifying other moral intuitions that it often loses its analytical integrity.34 'tte consequentialist defender of inequality is on unsteady ground arguing for mass inequality in any immediate contexts where it is obvious a more egalitarian distribution would be utility maximizing. As universal hedonists like Singer point out, this is often the case. As such it consistently follows that ta truly stringent consequentialism would require that anyone earning over $40,000 USD a year would be under a moral obligation to give their money to utility maximizing causes such as malaria vaccinations.35 Someone like Hayek can only respond to this by calling for a less stringent, more Kantian approach which is consequentialist in the vaguer sense. While permitting economic inequality and stark disparities may have some short-term negative consequences it is ultimately utility maximizing in the long run due to the wealth and innovation generated by unbridled capitalism backed by strict protection of property rights. But so removed from the immediate empirical contexts, such a consequen-tialist argument loses a considerable amount of the precision and scienti-ficity lauded by figures like Bentham. The problems become even starker when one realizes that many of the same neoliberals who make such fuzzy arguments about the long-term beneficial consequences of unequal capital also believe we cannot make firm economic predictions, since that would imply we understand enough about the economy to potentially regulate it.36 'ttis is course makes one wonder how we can be sure that
34 See Bernard Williams. Morality: An Introduction to Ethics. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2012) from pgs 82—97.
35 Peter Singer. Me Most Good You Can Do: How Effective Altruism Is Changing Ideas About Living Ethically. (New Haven, CN: Yale University Press, 2016).
36 As Quinn Slobodian points out Hayek and other neoliberals came to regard the economy as something akin to a sublime object. See Quinn Slobodian. Globalists: 'Me End of Empire and the Birth Of Neoliberalism. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2018) at pg 58.
                                      - 154 -
such stark levels of inequality are necessary to produce the most beneficial consequences in the long run, given we are not even capable of making short or long term predictions with any degree of accuracy. Moreover there is abundant evidence to suggest that simply supposing dramatic inequality and strict respect for property rights are necessary to generate mass wealth is misguided. During the Great Society era, and to this day, there are robust social democracies which impose high tax burdens on the wealthiest citizens while still remaining highly productive. Given this, the paranoia that any such efforts are simply bound to generate economic stagnation or downturns is simply that.37
Still, I do think the consequentialist argument is persuasive in so far as it stresses that striving for absolute equality can seriously impede incentive structures, which will ultimately not be the benefit of the least well off. Establishing a system of equal destitution would be neither moral or to anyone’s benefit. As such I think a level of inequality can be tolerated if it flows from the morally significant choices of individuals are the inequalities are, as Rawls would put it, to the benefit of the least well off. I will argue for this position in the next Chapter unpacking my approach to human dignity. More significant at the moment is the shared antidemocratic outlook which liberal defenders of property rights share with their egalitarian kin.
The Argument for Greater Democracy in Jurgen Habermas, Axel Honneth, and Seyla Benhabib
Egalitarian liberalism may have taken substantial strides in answering left critics on socio-economic justice. But is has done little to combat the equally significant criticism that liberalism is insufficiently undemocratic or even-particularly in its neoliberal variants-hostile to democracy. Egalitarian liberalism is as guilty of this as many, with the limitations of Rawlsian democracy being indicatory. Rawls’ most comprehensive effort
37 Thomas Piketty. Capital and Ideology. (Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2020).
                                      - 155 -to (indirectly) tackle questions of social freedom and democracy is in his paper “Public Reason Revisited.”38 There are considerable insights in this paper, but it remains attached to a stark conceptual and institutional division between the public political forum and the “background culture,” with citizens who do not occupy political office having few opportunities to genuinely sway politics. For instance, in his characterization of the public political forum, Rawls emphasizes the “discourse of judges in their decisions, especially judges on the Supreme Court, the discourse of government officials, especially chief executives and legislators, and finally the discourse of candidates for public office and their campaign managers .. .”39 Citizens participation in a representative democracy takes the form of a “moral duty” to hold politicians accountable. 'ttis is a very thin conception of democratic participation that is characteristic of liberals in a Rawlsian vein. Ronald Dworkin’s extensive focus on the transformative jurisprudence of the American Supreme Court in Freedom’s Law and other books-well criticized by critical legal theorists such as Allan Hutchinson-is another good example.40 'ttis demonstrates how even egalitarian liberalism remains enamoured with the transcendental institutionalism criticized by Sen and others; idolizing liberal institutions, relegating “background culture” to a second tier, and arguing citizens fulfill their moral duties by criticizing the Courts and politicians when they are unhappy.41 In my opinion we need a far more ambitious deliberative democracy to meet the problems of post-modernity, where long repressed
38 John Rawls. 7The Law of Peoples: With the	“Idea of Public Reason Revisited.” (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2001).
39 John Rawls. “The Idea of Public Reason Revisited.”	e University of Chicago Law Review, Vol 64, 1997 at pg 767.
40 See Ronald Dworkin. Freedoms Law: 7The Moral Reading of the American Constitution (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1997) For the critique see Allan Hutchinson. “Indiana Dworkin and Law’s Empire.” Yale Law Journal, Vol 96, 1987. Elsewhere Hutchinson makes the well taken point that often times liberal theorists assume that it was great judicial decisions which reshaped societies. This underestimates both the significant political agitation from the bottom up required to generate support for, say, Brown or Roe, while also ignoring the political and policy dimensions required to entrench change afterwards. Hutchinson is quite damning in Evolution and the Common Law. However he seems to have softened on the impact of judges by the 2010s. See Allan Hutchinson. Is Eating People Wrong?: Great Legal Cases And How 7They Shaped 7The World. (New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2011).
41 See Amartya Sen. 7The Idea of Justice. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009) at pg 10.
                                      - 156 -
“background” cultural issues have struck back with a vengeance. This is precisely what was proposed by deliberative democrats.
The critique of liberalism raised by deliberative democracy has been elaborated upon by a number of diverse authors, from Jurgen Habermas to Seyla Benhabib and Axel Honneth. What makes the deliberative democrats stand out from many of their liberal peers is the interdisciplinary sweep of the analysis. Habermas, Benhabib and Honneth have built bridges between analytical and continental philosophy, not to mention sociology, domestic and international law, and left critiques of modernity, in a rare demonstration of theoretical imagination and daring. Summarizing their position involves ignoring the substantial differences between the authors, not to mention a great deal of interesting material well worth examining. I will try to compensate by presenting the position as forcefully as possible.
The arguments for deliberative democracy began to gain traction in the 1980s and 90s through the work of Habermas, Guttmann, Thompson and others. Habermas is easily the more important figure, developing a systematic philosophical defense of deliberative democracy which rivals the work of Kant and Hegel. At the epicenter of Habermas’ ongoing project42 are two overlapping concerns. The first is a desire to break out of the constraining “philosophy of the subject” which has dominated so much of modern Western thinking. The second is to develop a modern critique of bourgeois liberal societies in the tradition of Hegel, Marx, and Adorno without falling into the authoritarian temptations or pessimism which held back much German philosophy. The two are intricately related since the philosophy of the subject, and its emphasis on either extolling or critiquing the atomized individual, has provided the ideological backdrop to liberalism since the advent of modernity.
According to Habermas, liberal capitalism has many accomplishments to its credit-as savvy critics like Marx and Weber well knew. But liberal capitalist societies are characterized by many distorting pressures which have become increasingly intense; particularly as neoliberal markets corrode the traditionalist lifeworlds on which liberal individualism
42 At 90 he has just produced a new 1500 page book on the history of philosophy, which sadly has not been translated in time to influence this book. May we all be half so vital in our old age.
                                      - 157 -parasitically depended during its earliest stages. One of the most transparent examples is the increasingly distorted communication generated by mass media-we must of course now add digital technologies of all sorts-which has undermined the impact of the deliberative public sphere once dominated by the literate bourgeois. This public sphere was the foundation upon which liberal ideology gestated and spread, fuelled by changes in material relations which enabled the rise of the middle class of non-aristocratic property owners, before taking to the streets. It was undoubtedly a relatively elitist sphere, which excluded formally or by effect much of the working population. But Habermas argues it none the less served a vital legitimating function once liberal societies got up and running,43 which has been undermined through the assimilation of media to the instrumental imperatives of the capitalist economic system. By contrast in the contemporary era where the “lifeworld” of substantive meaning has been colonized by the instrumental rationalism of the capitalist system, the public sphere is increasingly approached in a commodified form.44 Individuals have vested and firm interests which partisan actors and parties speak to, and they feel little obligation in adopting a more deliberative approach since the public sphere is now a competitive place where the stakes could not be higher. This in turn corrodes the sense of solidaristic trust on which the traditionalist lifeworld was built and on which liberal capitalism depended even as it ate away at it.45
What then is the solution to this problem? Habermas is unique in his insistence that these contradictory tensions do not imply that liberalism has “failed” as some put it and that we need a return to a more traditionalist and localized form of life ala Patrick Deneen.46 Nor does Habermas
43 This theme goes all the way back to J?rgen Habermas. The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An Inquiry into a Category of Bourgeois Society, trans. Thomas Burger (Boston, MA: MIT Press, 1991).
44 As discussed at great length in J?rgen Habermas. The Theory of Communicative Action Volume Two: Lifeworld and System-A Critique of Functionalist Reason, trans. Thomas McCarthy. (United States: Beacon Press, 1985).
45 Interestingly it took a long time for conservatives to recognize this very fundamental point in the twentieth century, even though earlier figures were highly cognizant of the role capitalism was playing in eroding traditional ways of life and environments. Recently it is Patrick Deneen who has done more than anyone to resuscitate this critique. See especially Patrick Deneen. Conserving America: Essays on Present Discontents. (South Bend, IN: St Augustine Press, 2016).
46 Patrick Deneen. Why Liberalism Failed. (New Haven, CN: Yale University Press, 2018).
                                      - 158 -
suggest that the only recourse is a total critique or rejection of modernity of the sort pioneered by many flavors of radical left theorizing from Adorno and Horkheimer down through so called “Young Conservatives” like Michel Foucault and classicists like Alain Badiou.47 Instead he wants to resuscitate what is best in modernity and liberalism, culling what is bad and carrying forward it’s more emancipatory and inclusive elements. As I understand it there are three main, interrelated reasons for this. I will summarize them briefly.
Firstly, Habermas’ belief is that a deliberative democracy characterized by robust egalitarian programs and international cooperation is the way forward, since it can enable the free use of dialogical reason to overcome alienated subjectivity and re-establish solidaristic attachments without the need to appeal to tradition in the strong sense demanded by conservatives. A deliberative democracy also legitimates political institutions and processes in a manner unavailable to liberalism and its more individuated forms of reason. While Rawls, Dworkin and others emphasize the importance of “public reason” in political legitimation, as already mentioned egalitarian liberals still insist on a transcendental institutionalism justified by appeal to broadly Kantian theories of rational and individual selflegislation. While there is supposed to be an upward chain of legitimation between individual self-legislators and their interests and the actual goings on at the institutional level, all too often these become disrupted due to the mutilation of public reason described above. A deliberative democracy that makes dialogical reason between subjects central, insisting that they explain and justify themselves to one another in good faith, can help mend this problem. Extended sufficiently upwards it can help generate less alienated institutions which genuinely fulfill the Kantian promise of a society where we are governed solely by the laws we give to ourselves.48 Secondly, as Axel Honneth observed, an egalitarian deliberative democracy actually completes the promise of liberalism by enabling the exercise of a richer conception of social freedom. Drawing on the work of Isaiah Berlin, Honneth observes that most liberals and socialists
47 J?rgen Habermas. “Modernity vs Postmodernity.” New German Critique, Vol 22, 1981.
48 Jurgen Habermas. Between Facts and Norms: Contributions to a Discourse Theory of Law and Democracy, trans. William Rehg. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998).
                                      - 159 -engage in debates about whether negative or positive liberty is more important. Honneth insists we recognize that all forms of freedom are essential, and moreover adds a third type: social freedom.49 Social freedom is the capacity to live under a system of government which we ourselves have chosen. Naturally this runs into serious methodological problems since, to an even greater extent than entailed in negative and positive freedom, our social freedom can only be exercised in tandem with others. Since everyone must have a say in choosing which system of government and policies to live under, our social freedom is highly qualified. Indeed critics like Jason Brennan see this as a fundamental flaw win deliberative democracy since, when parsed by hundreds of millions of citizens, the actual impact anyone has is extremely minimal.50 But deliberative democrats insist that this way of thinking remains too mired in the state form, failing to recognize the comprehensive nature of the project of democratization all the way down. We may have a minimal influence on politics at the state level, but can have quite a bit more when we scale down to local elections which often have a larger influence on people’s lives than what goes on in Ottawa or Washington. As put by Axel Honneth:
Democracy does not merely signify free and equal participation in political will-formation; understood as an entire way of life, it means that individuals can participate equally at every central point in the mediation between the individual and society, such that each functionally differentiated sphere reflects the structure of democratic participation.51
The third argument deliberative democrats offer for this position is the need to move away from the philosophy or ideology of the subject52 and towards a form of other-centered reasoning.53 The fundamental flaw with
49 Axel Honneth. Freedoms Right: the Social Foundations of Democratic Life, trans. Joseph Ganahl. (New York, NY: Columbia University Press, 2016) at pgs 42—62.
50 Jason Brennan. Against Democracy. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2016).
51 Axel Honneth. Me Idea of Socialism. (Medford, MA: Polity Press, 2017) at pg 92.
52 As examined at great length in J?rgen Habermas. Me Philosophical Discourse of Modernity: Twelve Lectures, trans. Frederick G. Lawrence. (Boston, MA: MIT Press, 1998).
53 Benhabib is especially emphatic on this point. See Seyla Benhabib. 'Me Rights of Other: Aliens, Residents, and Citizens. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2004).
                                      - 160 -
liberal philosophy, and one of the reasons it easily slides into the ideology brilliantly diagnosed by Marx, is its belief that the individual subject can ever find sufficient normative resources in themselves to establish a sense of meaning in the world. 'ttis in turn marries onto a capitalist system which elevates subject-centeredness to a theological principle. Unfortunately such subject-centered reasoning can only invariably create a sense of meaning in its own narcissistic image; in effect pulling itself up to normativity by its own bootstraps. This is conducive to the anomic and desacralized world so criticized by the most intelligent conservative critics, who none the less can think of no better solution than a return to a nostalgic and idealized past. By contrast deliberative democracy insists that we find meaning through forming solidaristic relations with other people, as various levels of democratic life. The relative indifference to forming such meaningful attachments, from the local to the state and even cosmopolitan level, is one of the reasons liberalism has faltered in the early twenty-first century.
I believe these arguments are strong and convincing; sufficiently so to warrant a serious reform of liberalism in a democratic direction. Saying that, deliberative democrats have often offered thin moral reasons for adopting their position. Habermas’ own efforts to situate the argument in a discourse ethics framework is representative here. In effect it makes normative judgements turn on a pragmatic assumption about language, which is effectively that in a truly ideal speech situation we will ultimate concede to the better argument. The deliberative democracy Habermas argues for is ultimately predicated on this assumption; though he is certainly not naive to all the ways communication is distorted by contemporary media, there is a deeper problem as far as I can see. Like many pragmatist theories of ethics, there is a dangerous circularity to Habermasian positions-for all their brilliance-which is perhaps inevitable to all resolutely post-metaphysical forms of anti-foundationalism. The standards by which we assess the propositional content of ethical claims are to be found in the norms of legitimation generated by the semantics of the community’s lifeworld. But this then raises serious questions about the integrity and validity of those norms outside of their historically situated contexts; a reproach the young Habermas himself directed against
                                      - 161 -Hans Georg Gadamer.54 It is possible that these norms might be immanently rationalized through a process of deliberative interrogation, but this would also come at the price of intersubjectively dissociating them the transcendental historical contexts which gave them legitimating authority in the first place. Such is the contention of more conservative historicists like MacIntyre55 and his defenders56 against Habermasian type arguments, and I think it is a compelling critique. We need a firmer moral ground on which to situate the insights of deliberative democracy: that provided by human dignity. Before discussing this I wish to talk briefly about how to build on the insights of liberal egalitarianism and deliberative democrats to develop a critical legal argument against the strong and unequal commitment to property rights shown by neoliberalism and other inegalitarian and anti-democratic ways of thinking.
The Argument Against Liberalism Summarized
In this Chapter I have stated what I take to be the two main objections to liberalism. The first is its tendency to support dramatic inequalities due to liberalism’s historical commitment to a very strict interpretation of property rights ala Locke, Nozick, and F.A Hayek. Egalitarian liberalism took a significant step forward in rectifying this defect and providing an analytically rigorous argument for why equality is important. The debt we radical egalitarians owe to figures like Rawls, Nussbaum, Sen and so on is considerable and often unappreciated by the political left. But egalitarian liberalism remained limited in another crucial respect, in that it maintained the unfortunate tendency to be suspicious of democracy and other participatory forms of politics. This means the critiques of deliberative democrats such as Habermas, Honneth, and Benhabib remain a
54 For an extensive discussion of this debate see Thomas McCarthy. The Critical Theory of Jurgen Habermas. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1978).
55 Alasdair MacIntyre. Whose Justice, Which Rationality? (Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre-Dame Press, 1989).
56 Jeff Nicholas. Reason, Tradition, and the Good: Macintyres Tradition Constituted Reason and Frankfurt School Critical Theory. (Notre-Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 2012).
                                      - 162 -
necessary corrective to a liberalism that remains strangely enamored with the transcendental institutionalism.
Taken together I think going beyond liberalism in a progressive manner has two prongs. Firstly, a progressive critique needs to provide a robust argument for more democratic rule which is both persuasive and inspiring. Such a defense is especially important in our populist epoch, when post-modern conservatives claim to speak for the people while pushing reactionary and inegalitarian policies.57 In such troubled times it can be tempting for progressives to turn their backs on democracy, and endorse more surefire ways of achieving policy success.58 To give just one example, in the American context there was serious pressure to rely on the judicial system to remove an unpopular President for his flagrant corruption rather than addressing the more complex structural problems underling the emergence of post-modern Trumpism. While I can understand such anxieties, I do not think a progressive project seeking to go beyond liberalism can engage in anti-democratic agitation. Moreover, I think a careful look at the evidence indicates that one of the factors explaining the rise of post-modern conservatism were feelings of political disempowerment by neoliberal reforms.59 To actually ameliorate these reactionary propensities, what it called for is a empowering of the demos rather than hostility towards it. In the next Chapter I will argue the way to accomplish this is through the extensive empowerment of democratic rights.
The second way to go past liberalism is through the establishment of a more egalitarian social system oriented by principles going beyond Lockean possessive individualism and neoliberal Kantian consequential-ism. We would accept the liberal premise that all individuals are moral equals, and connect that to a commitment to realizing material equality in a more robust way. Such an approach would of course constitute an
57 See Matthew McManus. The Rise of Post-Modern Conservatism: Neoliberalism, Post-Modern Culture, and Reactionary Politics. (Gewerbestrasse, SW: Palgrave Macmillan, 2019).
58 One of the most prominent routes typically taken is to look to the judicial system for salvation. For a variety of reasons well-articulated by Schlag I think this would be highly misguided. See Pierre Schlag. The Enchantment of Reason. (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1998).
59 See Matthew McManus. The Rise of Post-Modern Conservatism: Neoliberalism, Post-Modern Culture, and Reactionary Politics. (Gewerbestrasse, SW: Palgrave Macmillan, 2019).
                                      - 163 -exercise in ideal theorizing on distributive justice which has long been critiqued by critical scholars going back to Marx and Engel’s scathing denunciations of the utopian socialists.60 It also runs a more Foucaultian risk in providing a justificatory ideology for the operation of new forms of power and control.61 While I respect both of these criticisms, I feel they risk becoming overstated. Particularly in the current academic climate, when militant particularism has long been at the critical cutting edge while largely shying away from offering comprehensive alternatives to the status quo. 'ttese scholars have endeavored to put “trashing” over any theory which commits them to sustained moral judgements. But I do not ultimately think that is possible. While there is something to be said for the, ultimately conservative, disposition that one proceed cautiously when putting forward hypothetical arguments about economic equality, I do not think there is ultimately any evading what Rawls rightly called the burdens of moral judgement.62 If egalitarians want greater equality the burden is on them to not just show why the inegalitarian status quo is insufficient, but to provide a justified alternative which might take its place. If for nothing else that to carry on the conversation. Consequently I will argue we should realize a right to an equality of expressive capabilities, except where inequalities can be justified by the morally significant choices of agents and work to the benefit of the least well off. 'ttis position is, of course, highly Rawlsian in its broad contours. But it innovates on Rawls in some important respects; not least in its emphasis on an equality of capabilities rather than in resources and honors.63
Finally, I think that going beyond liberalism means going beyond the limitations of liberal legalism. This was of course one of the foundational insights of the critical legal studies movement to which the title of this book gestures. Critical legal theorists in the tradition of Unger and Schlag recognized the close association between the limitations of liberalism and the way liberal legalism functioned to prevent significant democratic and
60 See Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels. tte German Ideology. (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1998).
61 Michel Foucault. F/e Foucault Reader, ed. Paul Rabinow. (New York: Pantheon Books, 1984).
62 John Rawls. “The Idea of Public Reason Revisited.” e University of Chicago Law Review. Vol
64, 1997.
63 It is also far more democratic in orientation, as discussed above.
                                      - 164 -
egalitarian challenges to the status quo, often under the pretenses of providing stability for the sake of markets and property. Part of the challenge lies in the presupposition of liberal theorists, shared by even the most radical, that the purpose or even the very nature of law is the maintenance of order. This conviction is shared by everyone from positivists such as John Austin to natural law theorists like John Finnis and Lon Fuller and even legal hermeneuticians such as Ronald Dworkin. Even critics of the law is order theory such as H.L.A Hart and Joseph Raz couched their arguments in primarily normative terms; law will inevitably produce order, the question is whether obedience to that order is warranted from legal subjects. A critical legal approach to law which is not committed to stateless anarchism must show how a more destabilized system characterized by participatory democratic inputs can none the less function effectively; particularly if tied to a moral theory of rights as mine is. To try and answer this challenge, I will argue that the jurisgenerative rights to democratic authorship and equality of capabilities I argue for can be married to a dynamic model of the law. To help make sense of this new conception of law, I will be drawing on the history of dynamic philosophy-particularly the work of Henri Bergson and Gilles Deleuze-who offer a complex metaphysical ontology for how such creative evolution occurs through time. Bergsonian and Deleuzian ontologies insist that while the creative process is the most important element of reality, this does not imply that there are no permanently enduring features of the world.64As evolution does not destroy the genetic innovations of history but carries them forward, so too does reality generally not annihilate what came before but assimilates it within the wholeness of duration. My contention will be that we should reconstruct the law along similar lines. 'ttis is that law should be seen not so much as the top down establishment
64 Indeed Bergson insists that his model of existence and time shows how the past does not overdetermine the present or future, in part because the latter carry the past within them. As he puts it in Time and Free Will “Now, let us notice that when we speak of time, we generally think of a homogenous medium in which are conscious states are ranged alongside one another as in space, so as to
form a discrete multiplicity That which goes to confirm this opinion is that we are compelled to
borrow from space the images by which we describe what the reflective consciousness feels about time and even about succession; it follows that pure duration must be something different.” See Henri Bergson. Time and Free Will: An Essay on the Immediate Data of Consciousness, trans. F.L Pogson. (Mineola, NY: Dover Publications, 2001).
                                      - 165 -of order, but rather a bottom up jurisgenerative creation of the demos which constantly evolves and changes through time while maintaining continuity with the past.65 Such a system would not only be more democratic and egalitarian, but also gain a capacity for social innovation not available in more static liberal societies.
The animating expressivist ethic of this entire project of going beyond liberalism is amplifying human dignity. I define dignity as a status which operates on a continuum defined by our overall capacity for selfauthorship. We are dignified beings because we can define ourselves through redefining the world around us. Human beings enjoy more dignity the greater their capacity for such self-authorship is. Their dignity is seriously impeded where this capacity is strictly limited; reaching its apex in the horrific twentieth century efforts to reduce a human being down to what is chillingly referred to as “bare life.”66 The ideal of dignity of course has deep roots in the liberal tradition, which in part explain why I think going beyond liberalism means acknowledging our debt to it. Liberal societies, for all their titanic failures, contributed much to amplifying the dignity of human beings. We honor the liberal project by not resting on its laurels but through trying to unleash its fullest potential for all rather than just a few.
65 There is a precedent for developing such a conception of law in the history of pragmatic legal realism, as well as critical legal studies. I will address this shortly.
66 See Giorgio Agamben. Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life, trans. Daniel Heller-Roazen. (Stanford, California: Stanford University Press, 1998) and Hannah Arendt. The Origins of Totalitarianism. (New York, NY: Harcout, 1955).


Part II
A Critical Legal Approach to Dignity, Law, and Rights

 4
Dignified Self-Authorship and a Critical Legal Model of Rights

Human Dignity as the Moral Foundation of Rights
Human dignity is an eminently contentious topic.1 For a variety of Catholic thinkers dignity flows directly from God himself down to each individual human being. For others like Steven Pinker it is a singularly stupid idea.2 As enshrined in various legal and religious documents, dignity is intrinsically possessed by all individuals simply by virtue of being human. This is despite the fact that, as Waldron notes, it may well have emerged as a concept to help distinguish those of rank from those with none before gradually being extended to the entirety of the human species.3 Waldron is on firm ground here. Philologically the root of the word lies in the Latin dignitas, signifying worthiness, and the French
1 For a more extensive genealogy see Matthew McManus. Making Human Dignity Central to International Human Rights Law: A Critical Legal Argument. (Cardiff, UK: University of Wales Press, 2019) Chap. 1.
2 Steven Pinker. “The Stupidity of Dignity.” The New	,	May	28th	2008.
3 Jeremy Waldron. Dignity, Rank, and Rights: The Tanner Lectures on Human Value. Delivered at UC Berkeley, April 21—23, (2009).
                                      - 169 -M. McManus, A Critical Legal Examination of Liberalism and Liberal Rights, Palgrave Studies in Classical Liberalism, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61025-8_4
                                      - 170 -
dignite. It was often applied to refer to the worth of the nobility, who apparently weren’t venerated quite enough, as a quality of distinction.
Generally speaking modern theories of dignity tend to fall into two streams. There are those who regard dignity as an intrinsic moral feature of individuals.4 This is perhaps the most common way of understanding dignity, meshing in particular with liberal intuitions about the fundamental worth of the person. It has deep roots in the positions of Scholastic thinkers who spoke of the fundamental dignity of human beings as God’s favored creation, and found mature expression in the work of Kant. Particularly his claim in the Groundwork that each individual possess an inalienable dignity which placed them “beyond prince.” In the present day the individualist stream finds proponents in the work of figures like Ronald Dworkin, John Rawls, George Kateb, and others. Each of these figures gives a distinctive interpretation of where dignity comes from. For Dworkin, our dignity flows from respect for two moral requirements: taking the objective importance of our lives seriously, and trying to live authentically. In this respect dignity animates both our ethical requirements to live well, and our moral duties to others.5 Rawls has a more complex understanding of dignity, vacillating between giving it a more Kantian and more proceduralist twist. The constant seemed to be that individuals believed in their dignity and those of others because they had a “sense of justice” which applied worth to themselves and others.6 For Kateb, dignity assumes a more existential value related to the individual’s relationship to their identity. As Kateb puts it
Human dignity is an existential value; value of worthiness is imputed to the
identity of a person or the species. I stipulate that when the truth of identity is at stake, existence is at stake; the matter is existential. The idea of
4 Elsewhere I have described this as the individualist stream. See Matthew McManus. Making Human Dignity Central to International Human Rights Law: A Critical Legal Argument. (Cardiff, UK: University of Wales Press, 2019) at pg 40.
5 For a helpful, but critical, overview see Kenneth Simons. “Dworkins Two Principles of Dignity: An Unsatisfactory Nonconsequentialist Account of Interpersonal Moral Duties.” Boston University Law Review, 90, (2010). This interprets Dworkin’s argument on these points in Ronald Dworkin. Justice for Hedgehogs. (Cambridge, MA. Harvard University Press, 2010).
6 My reading here is inspired by Pritchard’s. See Michael S. Prithchard. “Human Dignity and Justice.” Ethics, Vol 82, 1972 at pg 300.
                                      - 171 -human dignity insists on recognizing the proper identity of individuals or species; recognizing what a person is in relation to all other persons and what the species is in relation to all other species.7
What I call the relational stream of modern thinking on dignity takes this last point more seriously than even Kateb, expanding it to be central to the concept. Relational theories of human dignity tend to criticize the individualist stream for in some respects making dignity intrinsic to the person. This gives it a tremendous moral weight, but also limit one’s ability to mobilize the concept dignity to engage in normative critique. If one’s dignity is intrinsic how can it ever be violated or undervalued?8 'tte argument of the relational critics is that dignity is a status one enjoys relative to others which can be advanced or inhibited through social change. As mentioned Jeremy Waldron is probably the clearest figure in this tradition, arguing that dignity was initially a term of status designating superior rank which has gradually assumed a more egalitarian connota-tion.9 Deliberative democrats like Seyla Benhabib and Jurgen Habermas have more sophisticated accounts which combine a genealogical account of dignity as a normative concept with complex arguments on how it can be amplified or constrained under the conditions of late or postmodernity. Often times they argue that amplifying dignity means empowering citizens and non-citizens to take a more active role in determining law and policy relative to the alienated conditions of the present.10 'tte virtue of the relational stream is precisely its analytical flexibility a concept which can be operationalized for normative critique. Its
7 See George Kateb. Human Dignity. (Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2011) at pg 10.
8 Relational critics are right to be concerned about this. In Lawrence v Texas Justice Clarence Thomas was asked whether prohibitions on homosexuality violated the dignity of LGBTQ persons, Thomas concluded that since everyone was born with dignity it could never be taken away be the state. Therefore one could not argue that restricting their actions and demeaning them through law constituted a violation of their dignity. This reasoning is highly self-serving, and one doubts Thomas would apply it consistently. But it does demonstrate the conceptual limitations of arguing that dignity is intrinsic, and as such, inviolable. See Corey Robin. 7The Enigma of Clarence fyomas. (New York, NY: Metropolitan Books, 2019).
9 See Jeremy Waldron. Dignity, Rank, and Rights. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2015).
10 See Seyla Benhabib. Dignity in Adversity: Human Rights in Troubled Times. (Cambridge, MA: Polity, 2011).
                                      - 172 -
deficit relative to the individualist school is dignity’s consequent lack of universality via it demotion from an intrinsic feature all enjoy simply by virtue of being human, to a status which is fungible depending on socio-historical context.
My own use of the term attempts to integrate these two positions together by showcasing how a human being’s innate capacity for selfauthorship can be constrained or amplified depending on the socio-historical contexts they exist within. At a more transcendental level it owes much to Pico Mirandola and Immanuel Kant, who I think respectively captured what is most essential in the concept of dignity. Mirandola anticipated the expressivist ethic at the core of dignity which I feel has been lost in later articulations why consider it an intrinsic quality-including Kant’s. As already discussed in Chap. 1, for Mirandola, it was the creative powers of human beings which elevated them above mere nature and granted them a revered status. As particular demonstrated in the liberal arts of philosophy and dialectic. Indeed he even compares such a capacity to creativity to divinity itself.11
The expressivist ethic at the heart of this account of dignity is highly inspiring, emphasizing the virtue of human being’s creative powers in creating and maintaining value in life more generally. However, it is limited by its elitist and over intellectualized presumptions wherein the most important products of dignity are invariably compared to the works of seminal figures in the history of Western thought. Little if any attention is paid to the inegalitarian connotations of Mirandolas account, which gushes with enthusiasm at the very elite driven Renaissance in fifteenth century Italy. 'ttis is one of the areas where Kant improves immeasurably on Mirandola. While his conception of universal dignity for all humanity remained compromised by his contemptible views of race, gender, and homosexuality Kant none the less too a massive step forward in his instance that each of us was a moral equal. The dignity of each person
11 Here Mirandola actually seems to anticipate Nietzsche in some important respects. He explicitly invokes Bacchus (Dionysus) as a revelatory figures who raises human beings up towards the Godhead through their creative capacity to create values ala Socrates, Plato, and others. This in turn makes us like “the very One who made us.” Where Mirandola avoids blasphemy is of course through the insistence that this is in emulation of, rather than in defiance of or a substitution for, God.
                                      - 173 -fundamentally put them beyond “price” based calculations of authorities, signifying that our societies had a duty to care for our needs and amplify our freedom. This was ultimately an emancipatory set of claims, regardless of their being frustratingly compromised in expression. Taken together, Mirandola’s expressivism and Kant’s universalism provide the tools required to develop a critical but substantive account of human dignity.
Roberto Unger on Overcoming False Necessity
My own conception of human dignity also owes a tremendous debt to the critical legal tradition, particularly the work of Roberto Unger. In some respects this might appear to be a self-imploding claim. The critical legal tradition, particularly in its classical formulations through the 1970s and 1980s, was consistently hostile to any appeal to normative concepts which reeked of liberal universalism. Some went even further and expressly denied that any critical legal approach to law, society, and morality could commit itself to a consistent moral outlook.12 To do so would inherently exclude alternative ways of looking at the world, smuggling in Western forms of reasoning to colonize various traditional forms of knowledge.
Roberto Unger is a unique exception to this rule; a Brazillian born scholar who has never shied away from theoretical ambition in virtually every field imaginable. Unger’s work synthesized many of the disparate strands of CLS scholarship together into a comprehensive theoretical framework which was unafraid of providing a substantive and inspiring alternative to the status quo. I have already briefly summarized the main contours of his philosophical position in Chap. 2. Here I will reiterate what I take to be especially important in his work when developing a progressive theory of human dignity.
12 This generated a considerable amount of criticism, particularly from conservative legal theorists. See John Finnis. “The Critical Legal Studies Movement.” American Journal of Jurisprudence, (30), 1985. This stubborn commitment to methodological relativism or at least normative pluralism has begun to soften. For an example see Kathryn McNeilly. “After the Critique of Rights: For a Radical Democratic Theory and Practice of Human Rights.” Law and Critique, Vol 27, 2016.
                                      - 174 -
What I take to be particularly important is Unger’s emphasis on the role human “context transcending” powers play in providing meaning to human life, in situations both auspicious and more down to earth. As mentioned in Chap. 2, Unger calls on us to reject the ideology of “false necessity” which claims that the social world as it exists is set in stone and can therefore only be subject to very minimal transformation. The sense of false-necessity has been established in a variety of formative social contexts, going back some ways. In Unger’s sociological analyses through the Politics trilogy he highlights some of the most important. Obviously conservative traditionalist societies are highly characterized by their investment in false necessity. This often occurs at the ideological level due to the naturalization of social hierarchies and rigid institutions, which are justified by appeal to a variety of epistemic discourses which abet preservation of the status quo. Class oriented capitalist societies were also subject to these propensities, displayed most dramatically when the middle-class bourgeois would side with the government against more revolutionary proponents-often appealing to the same traditionalist naturalism about hierarchy that the bourgeois would eschew in its own efforts to claim power. Finally, Unger also criticizes orthodox Marxism for its failure to take sufficiently seriously the emancipatory potential of critique and even the philosophy of history. This relates back to his own work on time in books such as The Singular Universe. Marx took a decisive step in critiquing thoroughly the false necessity of classical political economy, with its willingness to universalize an eminently contentious Lockean anthropology backed up by imperial force. For Unger, Marx rightly observed that this conceit ignored the way seemingly settled social forms changed throughout history as a result of human action. But he was unable to go all the way in stressing the absolute contingency of social life, and therefore leave everything open to the free exercise agency one would find in what Unger calls an “empowered democracy.” Instead Marx insisted on reinscribing a deterministic teleology into his philosophy of history, and even making this the bedrock of his scathing denunciations of the more open-ended utopian socialist formulations.13 In other words the false
13 Unger’s critique on this point is not just moral and social but also ontological. He disputes the philosophy of time which is implicit in the Marxist framework. Unger argues that the Marxist
                                      - 175 -necessity of bourgeois ideology was set aside, but only to embrace a new deterministic “science of history” wherein individual and even social freedom became subordinated to materialist dialectics.14
Unger argues that each of these positions has been limited by a philosophy which undervalues the possibility of fully liberated human agency. At the same time he is keen to argue against anarchist efforts that exclusively focus on agency as a normative basis, rejecting the need to establish cooperative social structures needed to truly empower individuals. Unger argues that that a dynamic “empowered democracy” is a society which eschews such false necessities while generating the conditions for both self and social creation. What is needed is to establish “structure-revising structures” which would facilitate the use of human being’s powers to transcend socio-historical contexts while still enabling cooperation for mutual benefit and advancement. Linked to my earlier claims of Mirandola and Kant, I think this position is vital to linking an expressivist and universal theory of human dignity to a comprehensive critique of the status quo and the ways socio-historical contexts continue to inhibit or fail to provide the conditions for dignified self-authorship broadly.
Unfortunately I feel that Unger’s position still remains relatively ambiguous from a normative point of view. While he has written an immense number of books, the visionary quality of his writing occasionally takes away from its argumentative heft. Oftentimes Unger will simply outline his ambitious programs, call for an embrace of their visionary but radical transformations, and leave it at that. While inspiring, I feel there is a need to supplement these ambitions with a more streamlined moral argument based on the importance of dignity. Such an argument can in turn be linked-as Unger himself would no doubt support-to liberalism in a manner which both reveres its contributions while recognizing its fundamental limitations.
approach to history still saw time as following a rigidly deterministic pattern set the laws of motion analyzed by dialectical materialism, similarly to other scientific phenomena which adhered to the laws of physics. By contrast, Unger argues that time is truly open ended, with even scientific laws emerging through an evolutionary process. See Roberto Unger and Lee Smolin. The Singular Universe and the Reality of Time: A Proposal in Natural Philosophy. (Cambridge, UK Cambridge University Press, 2014).
14 TThe term “science of history” comes from Althusser. See Louis Althusser. Reading Capital.
(London, UK: Verso Books, 1997).
                                      - 176 -
A Critical Legal Conception of Dignified Self-Authorship
This brings me to my own critical legal conception of human dignity. On my conception, dignity occupies a quasi-deontological status in the sense that each human being is entitled to enjoy it purely by virtue of their humanity. 'tte idea of dignity expresses the equal moral worth of all individuals. But this needs to be complemented by a sufficiently critical empiricism which is sufficiently sensitive to critique the highly specified barriers to amplifying dignity which exist in different socio-historical contexts. A critical legal conception of human dignity needs to have sufficient moral gravity to serve as an ideal which contemporary socio-historical contexts are not living up to, while also being flexible enough to provide normative guidance while critiquing a wide variety of different settings.
I argue that dignity is defined by an individual’s overall capacity to engage in self-authorship. This is a universal moral claim in the sense that dignity, as I unpack it, is valuable to individuals since the most important end we can set for ourselves is to live a life where we can become the kind of person we wish to be and have the kind of experiences we wish to have. It has an egalitarian dimension to it since, as moral equals, each should be equally capable of pursuing this end except where subject to acceptable qualifications.15 There are many different dimensions to achieving this end which are captured by the list of expressive capabilities each individual would require to engage in self-authorship. At this point the deon-tological universality of my conception of human dignity gives way to a more pluralistic empiricism stressing the need to look at the different socio-historical contexts within which individuals exist and either eliminating barriers to their expressive capacities or distributing goods and honors to amplify them. The conception of human dignity I am putting forward here has a quasi-deontological quality, but is also flexible enough to be applied in a variety of pluralistic contexts. Taking dignified selfauthorship to be the end of all human life, it also accepts that this will be
15 I shall address these in my arguments about the second right.
                                      - 177 -pursued in a variety of pluralistic fashions consistent with different cultures, personalities, and histories. It also recognizes that what is needed to realize this moral ambition is not simply the proper theory of right action, but a critique of the different socio-historical contexts which constrain dignity or have the potential to amplify it yet fail to do so. It insists that questions of what one should do morally are related to political and legal contexts, and should not be examined in a conceptual vacuum. This obviously dulls the analytical edge of such an account, but allows it to engage the real world at a more grounded level. Finally my conception of dignified self-authorship is designed to answer the motivation question by appealing to our existential desire to find meaning in life. I shall discuss why more momentarily.
With this objection discussed, I will now unpack each element of my conception of dignity.16 As already mentioned dignity is defined by an individual’s overall capacity for self-authorship. I believe dignified selfauthorship meshes not just with our quasi-deontological sense that everyone’s life is of great worth, but our hope that the end to which we put our life will be something that matters. Moreover dignity occupies a quasi-deontological status through emphasizing the equal moral worth of each individual. It follows Kantians like Korsgaard and Dworkin in holding that each individual’s life is equally valuable to them, and is in fact a condition for them to hold that anything is of value since commitments to value can only emerge for conscious living beings. As such each life should also be equally valuable to political and legal authorities, which all too often they are not.17 But it passes from this quasi-deontological
16 I have already discussed the objections I suspect would emerge from various forms of militant particularism, which in many respects come from the opposite perspective. While hyper-analytical moral theory insists on absolute stringency while often ignoring even political and legal context, for militant particularism context is everything. Even a comparable thin moral argument like the one I am putting forward is dangerously universalistic in its insistence the dignified self-authorship would be valuable to everyone. As mentioned this position is a useful warning against overambi-tious theorizing, but goes too far in the insistence that we can avoid the burdens of moral judgement indefinitely. It also has a strangely conservative dimension to it, with its strident skepticism towards all forms of universalism, rationalism, and a complete emphasis on history and context. As Eagleton would point out you wouldn’t need to tell Edmund Burke or Michael Oakeshott twice that one should be skeptical of any universalistic moral program which sets itself over and above context. See Terry Eagleton. fye Illusions of Postmodernism. (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell, 1996).
17 See Thomas Nagel. “What We Owe A Rabbit: A Review of Christine Korsgaard’s Fellow Creatures.” New York Review of Books, March 21, 2019.
                                      - 178 -
through contending that beings of equal moral worth must also be equally capable of engaging in self-authorship except where subject to acceptable limitations. How overall capable a person is of self-authorship is determined by what I call their individuated set of expressive capabilities. Expressive capabilities are the powers an individual may use to redefine the world around them, and in so doing define themselves. Because the power to redefine the world around us is highly contingent on each individual’s life circumstance, not to mention the socio-historical contexts in which they exist, different people may have more or less robust sets of expressive capabilities. The goal of a just society should be to amplify each individual’s overall set of expressive capabilities to the extent possible, enabling them to be ever more capable of dignified self-authorship.
The reference to capabilities is of course drawn from the work of Amartya Sen, Martha Nussbaum and others who follow Kant in emphasizing the importance of freedom to individuals. However they also recognize that the Kantian approach to freedom and dignity was highly abstract, operating at the purely transcendental level while linking in a tense manner with the empirical world.18 Sen and Nussbaum therefore draw on substantial research in economics, development studies, and a truly impressive array of disciplines to stress the need for political and legal authorities to be sensitive to the empirical constraints socio-historical contexts place of individuals’ exercise of their freedom. To address this they call for a focus on human capabilities, which define what individuals are able to do, rather than just what they are at liberty to do. While Sen has been noticeably reticent to provide any clarifying list of capabilities, Nussbaum lists the most important in her inspiring book Creating Capabilities:
1. Life: Being able to live to the end of a human life of normal length
2. Bodily Health: Being able to have good health
3. Bodily Integrity: Being able to move freely from place to place, security, and opportunities for sexual satisfaction and reproduction
18 I have discussed this problem for Kant in Chap. 1.
                                      - 179 -4. Senses, Imagination, and Thought: Being able to use one’s senses, imagine, think, and reason and to have these cultivated by an education and participatory culture. Being able to have pleasurable experiences.
5. Emotions: Being able to have attachments to things and people outside of ourselves and to not have one’s emotional development blighted by fear and anxiety
6. Practical reason: Being able to form a conception of the good and engage in reflection on it.
7. Affiliation: A) Being able to live with and towards others, to have institutions that foster this and B) Having the social bases for people to possess self- respect and not be subjected to humiliation.
8. Other Species: Being able to live with concern for and in relation to animals, plants, and the world of nature.
9. Play: Being able to laugh, play, and enjoy recreation.
10. Control Over One’s Environment: (A) Political-Being able to participate in political choices that govern one’s life, participate in politics, free speech. (B) Material-Being able to hold property and enjoy property rights on an equal basis with each other, to be protected against search and seizure, to engage in work and enjoy meaningful relationships with other workers.19
While I think this list is highly persuasive, I do think the capabilities approach of Sen and Nussbaum is subject to two important objections. Both are related in the sense of being mired in the Kantian formalism which dominates too much analytical liberal philosophy. The first objection is that the conventional capabilities approach is too focused on freedom as valuable in and of itself. I think this is objectionable since simply being more capable of freedom doesn’t define the end to which freedom should be set. I think dignified self-authorship compensates for these limitations nicely. The idea of self-authorship captures what is valuable in freedom, particularly the freedom of practical reason, with its insistence that the meaningful end of life is becoming the kind of person we wish to
19 The full list appears in Martha Nussbaum. I by and large agree with it. Creating Capabilities: The Human Development Approach. (Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2011) at pgs 33-34.
                                      - 180 -
be; not in isolation, but through active engagement with the world and others. We define ourselves by redefining the world around us. The second objection Sen and Nussbaum are open to is a theoretical ambiguity on what forms and how extensive political participation should be and what a more egalitarian scheme of property rights might look like. Certainly neither of these authors can be criticized for an indifference to either democracy or material equality; indeed as far back as his Nobel Prize winning work on famines Sen took both very seriously.20 But the exact role political participation and equality should take have an ambiguous status in their work. As does how to go about establishing a system of more equal capabilities beyond highly particularized policy proposals. I aim answer both these objections in the next section by linking their innovative capabilities approach to a critical legal model of rights.
Arguing for a Twinned Model of Two Basic Rights
There is something extremely odd about the whole idea of a critical legal model of rights. As highlighted in the Introduction and through Chap. 2, critical legal theorists are most famous (some might say infamous) for the glee they take in trashing the whole idea of rights. For Costas Douzinas rights are little more than the ideology of post-modernity, subject to all the conceptual and emancipatory limitations one would expect.21 For Michael Mandel, legalism around liberal rights is little more than a distraction from genuine political activism. It is also highly dangerous since Judges-coming from elite backgrounds and with minimal contact with workers-tend to interpret rights to reinforce the hegemony of class power.22 Allan Hutchinson takes a more post-modern theoretical approach in his criticisms of liberalism and liberal rights, but largely agrees with Mandel about the potential to depoliticize conflicts that
20 Amartya Sen. Inequality Re-Examined. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1992).
21 Costas Douzinas. The End of Human Rights: Critical Thought at the Turn of the Century. (Portland, OR: Hart Publishing, 2000).
22 Michael Mandel. The Charter of Rights and the Legalization of Politics in Canada. (Toronto, ON: Thomspson Educational Publishing, 1994).
                                      - 181 -warrant serious activism.23 Pierre Schlag argues that much of liberal rights discourse is built on circular reasoning designed to insulate powerful ideologies from critique.24 And Duncan Kennedy largely agrees, even chiding the political left for becoming enamored with rights discourse at the expense of earlier forms of political activism and theorizing.
This general Liberal idea is available to all. In other words, both liberal and conservative intelligentsias argue that the group interests they represent should be recognized in law by asserting that the recognition would be an instantiation of some set of outside rights. The proposed legal rules are not “partisan” but rather represent political beliefs and commitments that transcend the left/right divide. For many conservatives, rent control is unconstitutional. Likewise, the liberal intelligentsia argues that its program is just the vindication of outside rights, enacted in the Constitution, against their mistranslation in wrong legislative, administrative, and judicial decisions. I argued above that only since the 1970s has the left in general come to rely on rights as the principal basis for universalizing its positions. Before the 1970s, there had always been a live controversy between Marxists hostile to the whole rights formulation, social democratic progressive planners with a universalization project based on savings from eliminating wasteful and chaotic markets, and civil libertarians.25
Though in recent years there has been some movement away from the wholehearted critique of rights, much of this has little to do with an atti-tudinal shift and is more the result of political pragmatism. trough the 1990s to the 2020s, the failure of Marxist inspired states around the globe necessitated making peace with rights discourse, as one of the few avenues to agitate for progressive causes in a convincing manner. Consequently rights ceased to be simply ideological barriers to reform and became more like a double-edged sword; to be used cautiously, but always with the understanding that one was using the master’s tools to deconstruct his house. Hardly a glowing endorsement.
23 Allan Hutchinson. Waiting for C.O.R.A.F. (Toronto, ON: University of Toronto Press, 1995).
24 Pierre Schlag. “The Empty Circles of Liberal Justification.” Michigan Law Review 96 (1997).
25 Duncan Kennedy. “The Critique of Rights in Critical Legal Studies” in Janet Halley and Wendy Brown. Left Legalism/Left Critique. (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2002) at pg 189.
                                      - 182 -
The reason I have chosen to frame my argument for a democratic and egalitarian alternative to liberalism in terms of rights, despite this history, is complex. Firstly, while it is true that rights discourse is heavily aligned with liberal and now neoliberal thinking, as Jessica Whyte artfully observes, a historical association is not a necessary one.26 It is possible to conceptually untangle the emancipatory potential of rights discourse and deploy it for more progressive purposes. Saying that I also reject the idea that the historical association of rights discourse with liberalism invariably tarnishes it. Liberalism was an imperfect system marred by many hypocrisies in practice. That should not diminish its historical achievements as an inspiration for human emancipation from aristocratic and traditionalist hierarchies. The task of a critical legal conception of rights is to conceptually unlink from the limitations of liberalism, while acknowledging a continuity with the most positive elements of this history. Secondly, rights discourse has proven to be considerably more adaptive in practice than critical legal theorists often supposed. While there is still widespread state opposition to taking seriously the idea of economic, social, and cultural rights that has not stopped many NGOs and activists from using the language of rights discourse to agitate for greater equality and less exploitation. The well-known examples of the Right to Water and Sanitation, recognized by the United Nations in 2010, is telling here. These creative uses of rights discourse showcase not just its adaptability, but the still unexhausted emancipatory potential remaining in rights. Thirdly, a theoretical emphasis on rights discourse marries well with more practical needs for realism in agitation. The language of rights already exists within the law and commands a considerable degree of legitimating force in an overlapping range of communities from broad cultural backgrounds. An argument for radical change which is linked to rights discourse can piggyback on this legitimacy, facilitating efforts to enact reforms on the ground. And fourthly, as I hope to show, rights discourse can be linked to a theory which is genuinely egalitarian and democratic in its orientation and which does not merely replicate the limitations of liberalism in novel conceptual terms. There is a strange sense in which
26 Jessica Whyte. The Morals of the Market: Human Rights and the Rise of Neoliberalism. (London,
UK: Verso Books, 2019).
                                      - 183 -many post-modern critical theorists who are well aware of the fluidity of semantic meaning in discourse, none the less remain attached to a rigid idea of what rights can mean. But a theory of rights should be evaluated on its own terms, and not simply assimilated to a set of expectations and experiences which are external to it.
Related to the question of rights is the question of political legitimacy, or what institutions must do to retain sovereign authority over a given polity. I think has an integral relationship to political authorities respecting and amplifying the dignity of their citizens through respecting and making meaningful the rights they should enjoy. This is especially important if one believes dignity is related to self-authorship, which in turn is determined by the set of expressive capacities individuals27 under their jurisdiction possess. It means that political authorities cannot respect dignity amplifying rights simply by refraining from certain actions, which has long been the position of those who simply believe in negative liberty and rights. To truly amplify dignity political authorities must increase the overall set of expressive capabilities enjoyed by individuals to the extent possible and under suitably reasonable qualifications. This position can be expressed in the terms of rights discourse at a suitably general level, though many of the particular details must be left to democratic societies. Different socio-historical contexts will require different policies and interventions to amplify dignity through increasing individual’s sets of expressive capabilities, and it is up to the members influence to make such precise determinations independent of theoretical demands.
As already suggested, this account of the link between dignity, rights, and legitimacy, is in many respects highly Kantian. Kant is occasionally criticized, particularly in critical circles, for his apparent conformism and lack of reformist zeal. Very little attention is paid to his emphatic embrace of the French Revolution and its ideals, not to mention his still radical demands for not just republican but cosmopolitan governance. More to the point, as authors like Arthur Ripstein have pointed out, the framing of Kant as fundamentally a conservative figure who admired authority for its own sake does a disservice to the explicitly anti-authoritarian
27 In earlier formulations of this argument I used the term citizens. Since then I have to feel this
undervalues the cosmopolitan dimensions of amplifying dignity which it is crucial to stress.
                                      - 184 -
dimensions of Kantian political legitimacy and law.28 As already discussed, for Kant freedom is an innate right which everyone enjoys simply by virtue of being human. It is non-fungible and therefore must be respected by all political authorities. In his terminology, political actors must maintain the “rightful condition” of respect for human freedom to retain the authority to rule. Should they derogate from the rightful condition then its subjects are under no obligation to continue obeying. My argument would be very similar. Political authorities must seek to respect and amplify human dignity through establishing a meaningful set of rights enabling democratic authorship and an equal set of expressive capabilities for individuals under their jurisdiction. Should they largely or entirely fail to do so then those individuals would be under no obligation to continue obeying those authorities. In the event that political authorities are only partially in accord with their obligations to amplify dignity for all then various forms of civil disobedience may also be permitted, especially in cases where this failure flowed from prejudicial institutions.29
With all that said which rights are necessarily to establish the rightful condition for amplifying human dignity as I understand it? I believe there are two which are of fundamental importance, which have already been gestured to through this book. The two rights need to be conceived in the correct fashion. Firstly these are not positive rights of the sort that would be found in any number of liberal constitutions. While many of these are of varying degrees of generality, the enumerated constitutional rights so beloved by say, American jurists, are too particular to serve the function I intend for them. These also don’t occupy a purely legal status, being the necessary prerequisites for engendering legitimacy to the more
28 See Arthur Ripstein. Force and Agency: Kant's Legal and Political Philosophy. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009).
29 Tommie Shelby makes a similar point with reference to Rawlsian theory. He argues that in some circumstances the mistreatment and discrimination of African Americans in the United States reaches such a threshold that they are morally entitled to undertake normally illegal actions to resist carceral state power or pursue their material interests. This may not rise to the level of outright revolution, but can include acts of civil disobedience, petty crime and so on. I am largely in agreement with Shelby’s position. Though how such lines can be drawn is invariably a complex and loaded task. See Tommie Shelby. “Justice, Deviance, and the Dark Ghetto.” Philosophy and Public Affairs,
Vol 35, 2007.
                                      - 185 -positive system of law and rights as a whole. Instead the twinned rights serve as the most central norms orienting political behavior. To invoke Aahron Barak, if dignity is a “mother right” all possess simply by virtue of being human and which political authorities are under an absolute obligation to respect, the twinned rights are dignity’s immediate offspring or “daughter rights.”30 Amplifying dignity is the legitimating end of political authority, and respecting the twinned rights is the most effective way to go about achieving this goal.
The two twinned rights that are necessary to amplify dignity are as follows. Firstly, all citizens and individuals under state-or other forms of legal31- jurisdiction have a right to individual and democratic selfauthorship. They should be able to do as they wish with their lives, subject only to the limitations needed to ensure the same enjoyment of the right by everyone else. Citizens and individuals under state-jurisdiction should also have broad latitude to determine the laws and direction of institutions which govern them; both at the direct legislative level through democratic deliberation and interpretively through jurisgenerative practices. 'tte second right is that citizens and individuals under state jurisdiction should enjoy an equality of expressive capabilities, except where inequalities result from their morally significant choices or are necessary to benefit the least well off. 'ttis right persists through their lives, and does not just refer to ensuring a relative equality of expressive capabilities in initial conditions. The state must do what it can to ensure individuals are capable of self-authorship from the beginning to the end. Taken together, respect for the twinned rights would ensure individuals have a maximal capacity to engage in dignified self-authorship by defining themselves through redefining the world around them.
This argument for democratic and egalitarian rights aligns my position with both deliberative democracy and what is sometimes referred to as liberal (democratic) socialism. It follows the deliberative position that it is important not only for individuals to enjoy individual but also civic or social freedom. And it adopts the liberal socialist position that treating
30 See Aharon Barak. Human Dignity: 7The Constitutional Value and the Constitutional Right. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2015) pgs 157—169.
31 I say this because many of the same arguments could apply to sufficiently powerful international systems.
                                      - 186 -
individuals as moral equals means treating them as close to equals in fact, by emphasizing the most important capacities needed to lead a life of dignified authorship. It is also linked to both traditions in the deeper sense of being committed to an individualist ethic, in this case stressing the importance of expressivist self-authorship as the basis for a rich life. My account of rights rejects the idea that communities possess any intrinsic ontological status beyond the performative and transcendental commitments of individuals. This means that one cannot appeal to the community and its traditions as a justification for either restricting individual and democratic freedom, or insisting on high levels of inequality for cultural and historical reasons. However it does offer an answer to intelligent communitarian critics who rightly gesture to the emptiness of a life lived only for itself. In the concluding sections of the book I will address these objections in some detail, and account for how they pertain to my own arguments for the twinned rights.
In the meantime, I will discuss each right in more detail in the sections that follow, providing a justification for their importance and an explanation of their theoretical dimensions. 'tte Chapter will then conclude with a discussion of how the twinned rights can operate in tandem to establish the socio-historical and legal conditions for a dignified life, while complementing the project of critical legal theory.
The Right to Self and Democratic Authorship
'tte right to self and democratic authorship flows from the logic of liberal arguments for individual and political rights but emphasizes them to a stronger degree. It accepts the Kantian position in the Metaphysics of Morals-itself beholden to earlier republican claims-that individuals are not only entitled to live free so long as they do not interfere with others, but that legitimate laws can only emerge when they are authored by their subjects. This would require not only that liberal democracies permit a broad range of personal activities still subject to regulation and criminalization, but that they take far greater steps to enable citizen involvement in the legislative process than are allowed in most countries right now. Such a position is naturally subject to several objections. I will discuss the
                                      - 187 -most pressing while presenting my own arguments for why respecting a right to self-and democratic authorship is the best way to amplify dignity for all.
The first objection might appear to be a strange one, but it actually has some power in the forms articulated by Richard Wolff and Robert Nozick on opposite ends of the political spectrum. This is that my position operates in an uneasy relationship to its Kantian dimensions, stressing the importance of freedom while still arguing for the existence of a state and international law. While one might rebut, following Kant himself, that this includes a right to authorship of the laws which govern individuals, a critic of democracy like Jason Brennan might object that this merely moves the problem to a different level.32 Allowing a majority to determine how a minority acts simply because a vote has been taken is still a serious restriction of individual freedom; indeed perhaps the most serious since an authoritarian can be resisted more readily than a determined majority. For figures like Wolff, Nozick, or Brennan (in some moments), this demonstrates why anything more than a minimal or even nonexistent state may be going too far.
This objection has more teeth to it than is sometimes presumed, likely because the assumption of the state is so foundational to even the theoretical mindset that it is difficult to imagine how human politics could be organized without it. As put by Wolff:
Since it is indisputable that there are men who believe that others have authority over them, it might be thought that we could use that fact to prove that somewhere, at some time or other, there must have been men who really did possess legitimate authority. We might think, that is to say, that although some claims to authority might be wrong, it could not be that all such claims were wrong, since then we never would have had the concept of legitimate authority at all. By a similar argument, some philosophers have tried to show that not all our experiences are dreams, or more generally that in experience not everything is mere appearance rather than reality. The point is that terms like “dream” and “appearance” are defined by contrast with “waking experience” or “reality.” Hence we could only have developed a use for them by being presented with situations in which
32 Jason Brennan. Against Democracy. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2016).
                                      - 188 -
some experiences were dreams and others not, or some things mere appearance and others reality. Whatever the force of that argument in general, it cannot be applied to the case of de facto versus de jure authority, for the key component of both concepts, namely “right,” is imported into the discussion from the realm of moral philosophy generally. Insofar as we concern ourselves with the possibility of a just state, we assume that moral discourse is meaningful and that adequate deductions have been given of concepts like “right,” “duty,” and “obligation.33
The embarrassing fact is that many political theorists find it very challenging to actually justify the state beyond understandable but analytically empty appeals to realism or pragmatism, as Robert Dahl observed.34 My own response to this particular objection is that the argument for self and democratic authorship is grounded not in the absolute priority of liberty, but human dignity. Liberty of the sort emphasized by Nozick or Wolff is assumed to have an absolute moral weight which I do not think it warrants.35 This is because the virtue of liberty is not strictly in itself, but in how it facilitates our living a dignified life pursuing the projects and goals which seem worthy to us. Maximizing liberty is therefore extremely important, which is why the first right places such an emphasis on both individual and social freedom. But liberty is just one necessary condition for leading a dignified life; our overall capacity as determined by the set of expressive capabilities enjoyed by individuals is another. Leaning too heavily on liberty at the expense of amplifying expressive capabilities through a set of institutions like the state would leave individuals neither particularly free in the deepest sense, nor with the means
33 Richard Wolff. In Defense of Anarchism. The Anarchist Library Online, 1970 at pg 7 https://the-anarchistlibrary.org/library/robert-paul-wolff-in-defense-of-anarchism.pdf.
34 Robert A Dahl. Democracy and Its Critics. (New Haven, CN: Yale University Press, 1991).
35 Wolff makes this very express in his book In Defense of Anarchism. Early on he claims “The fundamental assumption of moral philosophy is that men are responsible for their actions. From this assumption it follows necessarily, as Kant pointed out, that men are metaphysically free, which is to say that in some sense they are capable of choosing how they shall act. Being able to choose how he acts makes a man responsible, but merely choosing is not in itself enough to constitute taking responsibility for one’s actions. Taking responsibility involves attempting to determine what one ought to do, and that, as philosophers since Aristotle have recognized, lays upon one the additional burdens of gaining knowledge, reflecting on motives, predicting outcomes, criticizing principles, and so forth.” See Richard Wolff. In Defense of Anarchism. The Anarchist Library Online, 1970 at pg 8 https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/robert-paul-wolff-in-defense-of-anarchism.pdf.
                                      - 189 -to remedy arbitrary circumstances which preclude adequate respect for everyone’s moral equality. An egalitarian democracy of the sort proposed here strikes a balance between our need for liberty and the demand to treat individuals as moral equals concretely. It also emphasizes the need for greater liberty than is currently permitted in liberal democratic states by enabling more participation by individuals in formulating the laws and institutions which govern them.
A second objection to the right to self and democratic authorship might come from liberal critics who are concerned with the negative impacts of a majoritarian system. I have already discussed such concerns extensively in Chap. 1, particularly when analyzing the critical positions of Locke, Madison, and others. This critique is typically formulated as follows. Liberal democratic societies are predicated on finding a balance between respect for individual rights and democratic participation in-typically republican- government. But in the event that a conflict between the two arises individual rights must prevail. This is because rights are conceived, as Ronald Dworkin eloquently expressed it, as trumps.36 They can effectively be used to block decisions of policy made be democratic societies because they occupy a principled deontological status beyond the consequentialist toos and fros of interests. In their weakest iteration, these liberal anti-democratic sentiments have largely been deployed as a means of reinforcing social hierarchies (more on that shortly). But in the stronger iteration the argument, particularly as espoused by critics like Dworkin and various critical race theorists, it takes on more heft. Critics point out that excessive majoritarianism may well enable majorities to tyrannize already vulnerable minority groups; this time giving their authoritarianism the gloss of democratic legitimacy. This critique imposes significant demands on those calling for greater democracy. The critical legal tradition in particular has long addressed the problems with systems of liberal rights, and the barriers they pose to democracy.37 And without a doubt many of these accusations ring true. But there has also been comparatively little energy put into formulating a response to the dangers of
36 See Ronald Dworkin. Taking Rights Seriously. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1977).
37 Michael Mandel. The Charter of Rights and the Legalization of Politics in Canada. (Toronto, ON: Thomspson Educational Publishing, 1994).
                                      - 190 -
majoritarianism, and the need for something like a system of individual rights to protect against it. As Brennan points out there is a long history of democrats simply assuming that the answer to the problems of democracy are simply more democracy.38 But if the history of the 20 th and now 21st centuries proves anything it is that the demos is often very comfortably putting their faith in reactionary figures eager to pin blame for social problems on vulnerable minorities. Critical theorists cannot afford to be so na?ve on these points or leave them unanswered.
My response to this is that the right to individual and democratic selfauthorship is not intended as providing support for unbridled majoritari-anism. The emphasis on both individual and democratic authorship is key here.39 To engage in individual authorship, the general right should be interpreted as birthing a number of positive rights in the vein of the standard liberal protections against majoritarianism; most particularly positive rights to expression, association, life, religion, non-discrimination on the basis of sex-gender, sexual orientation, race and ethnicity, and fair and equal access to the law in criminal situations. Indeed I would argue that under the model proposed many of these rights would become more meaningful-many individual’s rights to expression would be amplified through granting more equal capabilities, and rights to association would have a great impact through expanded democratic powers. These positive rights, birthed from the general right to individual authorship, would buck efforts by prejudicial majorities eager to trample on the vulnerable. However, the standard liberal rights would also be complemented and expanded by a focus on positive and civic, rather than just negative liberty. Individuals should not only be protected against the impact of the state through legal rights, but in fact empowered in relation to it through enabling their democratic participation to a far greater extent than is permitted now. Moreover, as I shall discuss later, the right to democratic authorship also expands the terrain of rights discourse into other realms of power through insisting on politicizing institutions which have previously been relegated to the liberal private sphere. This includes the economy and the family. Workers, women, and economically marginalized
38 Jason Brennan. Against Democracy. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2016).
39 Unfortunately this point was insufficiently stressed in earlier presentations of this argument.
                                      - 191 -minorities have all too frequently been denied both negative liberties and a democratic say in the formation of these “private” institutions under the auspices of liberal law. The right to democratic authorship insists that protection for individuals must extend to these institutions as well, and the best way to do this is through enabling their capacity to participate and deliberate on the rules applied in these institutions.
A third objection to a right to individual and democratic self-authorship might be more subtle, but no less important. Contemporaneously it is typically raised by conservatives in a Straussian or MacIntyrean vein-usually with a religious undertone.40 Going back to antiquity with Plato and Aristotle there have been those who have objected to democracy on the grounds that it enables the unworthy too much power. In Book VI of The Republic Plato puts forward a remarkably powerful metaphor expressing the fundamental objection. He asks us to conceive the state as rather like a ship at sea, and goes on to question who should be guiding it through potentially treacherous waters. Should the sailors? The travelers? Or the Captain? Most of us would emphatically argue that the Captain should be the one calling the shots. Alternately the ship will be guided by a competing variety of quarrelling and potentially uneducated opinions. It will either go nowhere, or crash on the shores of discontent. Far better to have an experienced and knowledgeable leader guide it to safety due to her wisdom and experience. This of course is a metaphor for Plato’s famous objection against democracy as rule by the mob, and builds the case for the rule of wise Philosopher Kings over the demos.41 Aristotle makes a similar argument at the individual level when discussing his arguments for virtue ethics.42 Some individuals are more subject to internal disorders than others, merely pursuing this or that slavish desire without any rational consideration. Such an individual’s life never appears to come into focus, as she is driven to extreme behaviors and never able to achieve a “golden mean” consistently enough to achieve Eudaimonia. As democracy is an irrational and tempestuous political system for Plato, so
40 The Catholic outlet First Things specializes in these kinds of objections.
41 Plato. The Republic, trans. G.M.A Grube. (Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing, 1992) pgs 157-185.
42 Aristotle. The Basic Works of Aristotle. (New York, NY: The Modern Library, 2001).
                                      - 192 -
the individual irrationally pursuing desire after desire without virtue is doomed to unhappiness. For both, a partial solution is the establishment of a polity which imposes restraints on individuals for the sake of maintaining social harmony and to inspire individuals to develop the virtues.43
Contemporaneously, iterations of this argument are frequently invoked to criticize both democracy and liberalism. Since my argument radicalizes the liberal tradition while calling for greater democratic involvement it is naturally subject to the same objections. Of course few twenty-first century authors would go as far as Aristotle in characterizing the mass of people as “natural slaves” unable to govern themselves in the least, and therefore only fit to be ruled by their betters. But modern critics tend to stress the need for a more hierarchical system which rewards and empowers the worthy, while countering the vulgar excesses of liberal democracy. Straussians are perhaps the most well-known group in this category. Strauss himself famously followed Constant in distinguishing between the liberties of the Ancients and the moderns. The Ancients held that true liberty came only from a form of self-mastery associated with virtue, including displays of virtue through civic participation and a refusal to be dominated by evil and tyranny. By contrast the moderns came to place greater and greater stress on liberty merely being permitted to do as one likes.44 In a somewhat different vein, Patrick Deneen observes that liberalism has “failed’ in part because it placed so much emphasis on this modern conception of liberty. It began by insisting the state refrain from interfering with anyone’s pursuits, and ended with calls for the massive intervention of state power to satisfy all human desires.45 Finally contemporary Aristotelians and Thomists, such as Alasdair MacIntyre and John Finnis, often argue that contemporary liberal-democracies do not provide individuals with what they need to lead a life of true flourishing. For MacIntyre liberal societies have become increasingly dominated by a
43 I say partial because neither Plato or Aristotle are confident most individuals will be able to achieve the philosophical or practical wisdom needed to lead noble lives, which is perhaps why both relegated huge swathes of citizens and subjects to second or even slavish conditions.
44 Leo Strauss. Natural Right and History. (Chicago, IL. University of Chicago Press, 1953).
45 Patrick Deneen. Why Liberalism Failed. (New Haven, CN: Yale University Press, 2018).
                                      - 193 -technocratic focus on the means to achieve human desires.46 At the same time they provide ever less guidance on which ends are worth pursuing. 'tte only way to correct for this problem is a rejuvenation of virtue ethics through a renewed emphasis on culture. This would provide a sense of unity and meaning to human life in our nihilistic time.47 Finally John Finnis objects to liberalism through a critique of legal positivism and rights discourse. Echoing MacIntyre, Finnis contends that legal positivism and liberal rights discourse have disconnected themselves from any account of what is necessary to secure human flourishing. Finnis resuscitates the classical Aristotelian conception of practical reason to argue for seven basic goods: life, knowledge, friendship and sociability, play, aesthetic experiences, practical reasonableness, and religion.48 Since securing these goods as a community requires authority, Finnis supports the
46 Interestingly, despite the overlap between their positions, MacIntyre is scathingly critical of Frankfurt School theorizing on the subject. See Alasdair MacIntyre. Marcuse. (Roermond, NL: Fontana, 1970). My suspicion is this owes at least something to a convert’s zeal; MacIntyre was famously a Marxist in his youth and gradually moved to embracing Aristotelianism and traditionalism with age. His critiques of Marcuse for engendering a sense that human nature was infinitely malleable and modern individuals rendered entirely passive and one-dimensional by industrial society misses the democratic particularism of Marcuse’s interventions; most notably his support for the student movement as a counter-force for breaking the shackles of the time. Marcuse would likely object than in developing a theoretical alternative to liberalism and liberal democracy, MacIntyre is assuming a position of intellectual authority entitled to imposing a new vision of human flourishing on subjects who should be left free to deliberate upon and establish such conceptions on their own. Though I tend to side with MacIntyre against those objections, they are fair and he does not always engage with them in good faith. Moreover MacIntyre sometimes overestimates how much his own position retains much of the modernity account of human beings as malleable historical creatures. Indeed without such a position his own narrative about modernity and its nihilistic qualities would lose much of its force, since if human nature is persistent and cannot be pacified then there is little reason to object to liberal democracy. For a more nuanced and less polemical look at these issues see Jeff Nicholas. Reason, Tradition, and the Good: Macintyre’s Tradition Constituted Reason and Frankfurt School Critical 'Meory. (Notre-Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 2012).
47 See Alasdair MacIntyre. After Virtue: A Study in Moral 'Meory. (Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre-Dame Press, 1981) Alasdair MacIntyre “The Virtues, the Unity of a Human Life, and the Concept of a Tradition” in Liberalism and Its Critics, ed. Michael Sandel (New York, NY: New York University Press, 1984) Alasdair MacIntyre. Whose Justice, Which Rationality? (Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre-Dame Press, 1989).
48 It is noteworthy that none of these basic goods expressly includes any material goods; to food, shelter, medical care and so on. Finnis does endeavor to correct for this by lumping them into the good of “life.” But their resignation to subsidiary status is telling. He also does not place either individual or social freedom anywhere. This reflects the rather withdrawn and aristocratic dimensions of his work, inherited uncritically from Aristotle.
                                      - 194 -
establishment of a legal system and other institutions necessary to preserving a form of order. Controversially, this authority would also be morally permitted to prevent individuals from engaging in immoral acts such as “the evil of homosexual conduct”-which Finnis rather embarrassingly compares to bestiality.49 Finnis goes on to link his argument for the good to a more metaphysically ambitious program, offering a renewed argument for the existence of God-and the Christian God in particular. He also tries-not very successfully-to contend that since alternative monotheistic ontotheologies are unattractive morally and aesthetically-at least to Finnis (cough, cough, Islam)-they can be rejected.
The quality of these conservative arguments range more widely than the earlier objections, sliding between profound to eye rolling. The most
49 John Finnis. “Law, Morality, and Sexual Orientation.” In John Corvino. Same Sex: Debating the Ethics, Science, and Culture of Homosexuality. (Lanham, NY, Rowman and Littlefield 1997) at pg 33. This essay is rather comical piece of work, unworthy of serious consideration. Finnis’ argument is largely that homosexuality-and homosexual acts in particular-are unworthy because they are not conducted in a marriage and so therefore can neither produce the friendships or the offspring characteristic of heterosexual married relations. Finnis also argues that homosexual acts “treat human sexual capacities in a way which is deeply hostile to the self-understanding of those members of the community who are willing to commit themselves to real marriage in the understanding that its sexual joys are not mere instruments or accompaniments to, or mere compensations for, the accomplishment of marriage’s responsibilities, but rather enable the spouses to actualize and experience their intelligent commitment to share in those responsibilities, in that genuine self-giving.” There are obvious objections one could make to this. The first is it is unclear why only sexual acts committed in a marriage can produce either the friendship or offspring needed for the good life and to perpetuate the community. Simply appealing to the Ancient’s characterization of marriage as “natural” is insufficient-after all Aristotle also held slavery to be natural. Perhaps they were simply wrong? Secondly even if marriage were necessary to secure to sufficient friendship and the conditions for pro-creation, the simple answer would be to extend the right to marry to homosexuals so they too could engage in marital sexual acts. Indeed one could turn things around and contend that if marriage is necessary to secure the conditions for good sexual acts generating friendship, by denying them this opportunity Finnis decreases the amount of possible goodness in the world. Thirdly, Finnis seems aware that his objection from pro-creation is very thin. Many heterosexual couples are unable or unwilling to pro-create, whether due to infertility, moral reasons concerning the environment and population control, or mere desire. Finnis’ only reply is that none the less such heterosexual acts have “procreative significance”-whatever that means. For that matter a biological and sexual male who reproduces with a trans man who still has a uterus has more opportunity to procreate than a sterile heteronormative couple. Why the latter engage in an act with more pro-creative significance than the former-who can actually pro-create, is a mystery. Finally to Finnish objection that homosexuality treats sexual capacities in a way that is deeply hostile to the members of the community who commit themselves to “real marriage,” I can only remain puzzled by what he means. The argument is entirely circular. Finnis objection that marriage could be between homosexual couples is to assert that “real marriage” is between a man and a woman, therefore there can be no argument for marrying LGBTQ people. A truly unworthy essay.
                                      - 195 -profound objections do indeed make a valid claim that freedom detached from any sense of the ends to which life should be committed is potentially empty and meaningless. The more eye rolling come across as little more than cantankerous whining by conservatives who will happily complain about the oversensitivity of modern “woke culture” one minute, before expressing outrage at two men holding hands the very next. With some authors, for instance the late Roger Scruton, one gets the profound and the crochety blended.50 There are two rebuttals one can make to these conservative critiques. The first that many of them are actually far more beholden to the modernist paradigm than is acknowledge. The less metaphysically ambitious figures, for instance Strauss, MacIntyre and Deneen, tend to argue that there needs to be some moral system which provides a convincing conception of the ends worth pursuing in human life. However they largely refrain from offering any metaphysical or meta-ethical defense which would support such a position. At best there is an appeal to the virtue or nationalism or tradition. But this doesn’t truly eliminate the problem of which ends are worth pursuing, but merely moves it from the individual to the social level. While a Burkean like Russell Kirk might object that social traditions are more plausibly convincing than the products of individual reason because they have emerged spontaneously and stood the test of time, the proof for this needs to be far more rigorous than a mere appeal to the rosy disposition or attitude of conservatives towards their idolized traditions.51 Indeed it is sometimes surprising that this appeal to mere affect has resonated with conservative intellectuals for such a long time. The fact that one feels an attachment or sentiment towards a tradition and conception of ends which seems right is no indication in and of itself that it is. One man’s cherished social tradition may well be another’s ruling ideology. Providing a more convincing argument for why a given conception of ends should be adopted would require leaving the morass of relativistic traditionalism and presenting genuinely robust metaphysical or meta-ethical arguments. Where
50 See his rather Islamophobic ruminations at the conclusion of an otherwise very helpful summary of the conservative in intellectual tradition in Roger Scruton. Conservatism: An Invitation to the Great Tradition. (New York, NY. All Points Books, 2017).
51 Russell Kirk. The Conservative Mind. From Burke to Eliot. (Washington, DC: Gateway Editions, 2016).
                                      - 196 -
these conservative critics have done so, as with Finnis and his theological musings, the results have been unimpressive to say the least. Given these problems, one is tempted to agree with the conservative critics that some conception of the ends to which human life should be directed is necessary, but at the same time insist that their formula for what these ends should be is unconvincing. They involve either moving the problem from the individual to the social level or engaging in wild ontotheological speculations which would look anachronistic in the seventeenth century.
The second argument against this conservative critique is more Kantian, and focuses on the importance of freedom for securing the conditions for virtue. Kant famously opined that the only thing which can be considered unconditionally good is the good will, or the will which submits itself freely to the moral law. In the event that conformity to what is good, including good ends, is forced or demanded by authority its quality is destroyed.52 The similar objection applies to those, like Yoram Hazony, who insist that true conservatives should ignore their personal beliefs about the existence or not of God and conform to their tradition’s religious beliefs.53 While forced conformity to good ends mutilates the goodness of those acts, forced conformity to a religious tradition brings with it the serious danger of inauthenticity before God. Which-depending on one’s convictions about the divine-may be even worse.54 Like the Rousseauean injunction about forcing people to be free, the call to force them to be good and noble-particular when one’s conception of ends may be subject to the objections raised above-seems perverse and counterproductive. Unless individuals choose to adopt and pursue a given set of ends under conditions of political and socio-historical freedom they cannot be considered to have done so in a worthy manner.
With these objections aside, it is important to clarify in more detail how the right to individual and democratic authorship could be realized. I think there are a number of possibilities, some more appealing than
52 Even some conservative commentators were aware of this. See Frank S. Meyer In Defense of Freedom and Related Essays: With A Foreword by William C. Dennis. (Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Fund, 1996).
53 See Yoram Hazony. “Conservative Rationalism Has Failed.” The American Mind, June 24th 2019.
54 Charles Taylor raises these objections towards Catholic conservatives in his monumental book on secularism. See Charles Taylor. A Secular Age. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2007).
                                      - 197 -others. As already mentioned the most immediate step would be to appeal to the right to self-authorship to justify the more specific and standard liberal rights guaranteed by many constitutions across the globe. This would be necessary to facilitate individual self-authorship when carried out in tandem with respecting the second right. More distinctly, realizing the right to self-authorship would then require democratizing many other institutions which are currently organized through vertical or at best quasi-participatory forms of authority. 'ttis includes law, the workplace, and the family. Democratizing the law would be a serious undertaking since the focus of legal thinking, including liberal legalism, has always been on the establishment of a propertied and insufficiently democratic order. This is antithetical to the expressivist ethic underpinning my account of dignified self-authorship, and so poses a barrier to full realization of the first right. So important is this point that I will dedicate the entire next Chapter to exploring it. Provisionally, I would say that positive rights need to be interpreted in a more jurisgenerative manner as establishing condition for the robust participation of citizens and individuals under legal jurisdiction in the laws which govern them. Rights to vote should be interpreted as establishing a legal opportunity to do more than just cast ballots for representatives. Instead there should be more direct democratic forms of voting established; one promising possibility discussed at length recently is the possibility of setting up novel forms of direct digital e-democracy which would facilitate participation through the internet. Voting rights should also be militantly defended to ensure participation from all, preventing legislators from formally or substantively disenfranchising citizens or individuals under their jurisdiction. Rights to expression and-or speech shouldn’t just be interpreted in a negative sense as being unhindered from expressing an opinion. Instead they should place obligations on political actors to amplify forms of expression and opinions. Particularly those which have traditionally given less weight due to discrepancies in wealth and power. Finally the right to democratic self-authorship requires that such rights be meaningful to all, which would require taking efforts to ensure there are not wide discrepancies in the possibility of some to influence an election relative to others. These discrepancies often appear in federal systems, for instance the United States, where there are substantial differences in voting power generated
                                      - 198 -
through gerrymandering, the idiosyncrasies of the electoral college, and other oddities. Truly respecting individual’s rights to democratic selfauthorship would mean ameliorating or eliminating these discrepancies, except in very exceptional circumstances where it is necessary to give a select minority a meaningful opportunity to participate in government.
Also important would be democratizing the workplace and the family, which have usually been relegated by liberals to the private sphere. The first is particularly important since efforts to democratize the workplace have generally stalled and retreated in most developed states; with the partial exception of Finland and some of the Nordic countries. From about 20.1 per cent of the workplace in 1983, under relentless pressure from successive Republican and Democratic administrations, union membership has fallen to around 10 per cent in the United States.55 Similar, though less dramatic stories, can be told in many other countries. This is unfortunate since, while often imperfectly governed and even corrupt, unions were one of the few institutions which served to democratize the workplace and counterbalance the ever growing power of capital relative to labor. The right to democratic authorship would require substantive efforts to correct for this unfortunate historical trend, through the restoration of powerful unions in the workplace. In ideal circumstances, one might even see the need for labor unions to prove a counterbalance to capital become eliminate as workers came to manage firms themselves, as with the Mondragon Corporation in Spain. While this would constitute a more thorough democratization than simple unionization, the latter can be a stepping stone towards the former through building the necessary institutional capacity and political culture necessary for democratic control of industry. In the case of the family, many feminist theorists have pointed out how its insulation from rights discourse through being relegated to the private sphere has undermined the quest for women’s emancipation.56 How to go about democratizing the family by ensuring women in heterosexual relations have a more equal role has been a matter
55 The Piketty Line. “How the Decline of Unions Will Shape America.”	,	July 10th
2018 https://www.economist.com/united-states/2018/07/19/how-the-decline-of-unions-will-change-america.
56 See Catharine MacKinnon. Towards a Feminist Theory of the State. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1989).
                                      - 199 -of serious debate amongst feminists, with some supporting more essentialist and others more radical or anti-essentialist solutions. There are also considerable debates about the dangers of cultural colonization through imposition of Western standards of equality and democracy in contexts where they are unfitted. My own position is that the right to democratic authorship would be more firmly realized through adopting a context-sensitive approach to sexual democracy in the family which held that cultural mores and preferences should be given some weight. However, the demands of cultural norms cannot be invoked to trump the right to equality if that is what women in the family demand. Adherence to a more conservative division of sex-gender roles in the family, where that is associated with acceptance of patriarchal norms, is only tolerable where the women impacted accept this division. In the event that they do not, political authorities can legitimately invoke the right of individuals to democratic authorship to insist the conservative families adopt a more equally participatory division of powers. This can take the form of establishing a series of positive rights designed to empower women, particularly those wishing to leave dangerous or abusive families.
There are many other possible institutions where the right to democratic authorship might be applicable. The examples sketched out here are just intended as a beginning. This is because the right to individual and democratic dignified authorship is intended to apply expansively across the socio-historical contexts inhabited by individuals. It is ultimately linked to human dignity through amplifying individuals capacities to define themselves through redefining the contexts in which they live; particularly those which for too long have been oriented by power. But in itself the right to individual and democratic authorship is incomplete since it leaves relatively untouched the material relations which are the major constraint on many individual’s expressive capabilities. In other words, amplifying negative liberty and social freedom through democratization are not enough. What is required is a commitment to achieving a greater equality of expressive capabilities which would truly enable individuals to lead dignified lives. I will turn to this argument now.
                                      - 200 -
The Right to an Equality of Expressive Capabilities
The right to an equality of expressive capabilities is sure to be more contentious than even an expansive right to individual and democratic authorship. This is because, despite various criticisms from the left and right, most commentators are reluctant to wholesale reject either liberal individualism or democracy. While critical legal theorists take issue with liberal rights in the name of democracy, and conventional conservatives take issue with democracy in the name of anti-majoritarian rights, both tend to seek some form of balance between the two.57As everyone from Zizek to Brennan have acknowledged, most academics still tend to accept liberal democracy as legitimated by a de-facto overlapping consensus. Some may be willing to contemplate the expansion of this logic in the way that I have described, or at least consider it. By contrast, there has never been anything approaching a consensus on the proper distribution of resources across society. There have been arguments for positions ranging from extreme equality to extreme inequality, and there rarely has been agreement even on how to approach the question.58
The argument for a right to equality of expressive capabilities, subject to qualifications, flows from the deeper commitments articulated to the moral equality of individuals and the need to amplify their capacity for dignified self-authorship. It holds that treating people as moral equals means ensuring they have an equal set of expressive capabilities which are necessary to lead a dignified life, except where inequities flow from their morally significant choices or are necessary to benefit the least well off. At the conclusion of this section I will present several of the arguments
57 I say conventional conservatives because the new post-modern conservatives who have emerged tend to be more overt in their willingness to reject liberal rights for illiberal democracy. In the case of the more authoritarian, such as Victor Orban, even their support for democracy is becoming slippery. See my discussion in Matthew McManus. 7The Rise of Post-Modern Conservatism: Neoliberalism, Post-Modern Culture, and Reactionary Politics. (Gewerbestrasse, SW: Palgrave Macmillan, 2019).
58 For two remarkable histories on this theme see Thomas Piketty. Capital and Ideology. (Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2020) and Thomas Piketty. Capital in the Twenty-First Century, trans. Arthur Goldhammer. (Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2014).
                                      - 201 -which might be raised against the right to equal expressive capabilities; largely from competing schemes of distributive justice.
I have already argued at some length for why the classical liberal, in particular Lockean, argument for inequality are subject to serious objections. Therefore these arguments will not be rehashed here. The last inegalitarian position I wish to discuss is the argument for capitalist meritocracy and what Rawls calls perfectionism. These positions are not entirely analogous but share many similar outlooks; at least enough that the argument against them can be reasonably compressed in the interest of economizing. A capitalist meritocrat, such as Jordan Peterson, holds that a good society is one where goods and honors flow to those who are the most competent on the basis of their contribution. This also means that a hierarchy will evolve due to who is rewarded on this basis, and is justifiable both by nature and morally. As he puts it in 12 Rules for Life:
All that matters from the Darwinian perspective is permanence-and the dominance hierarchy, however social and cultural it might appear, has been around for some half a billion years. It’s permanent. It’s real. The dominance hierarchy is not capitalism. It’s not communism either for that matter. It’s not the military industrial complex. It’s not the patriarchy-that disposable, arbitrary, malleable cultural artefact. It’s not even a human creation; not in the most profound sense. It is instead a near-eternal aspect of the environment, and much of what is blamed on these more ephemeral manifestations is a consequence of its unchanging existence.
A perfectionist, such Strauss or Nietzsche, holds that a good society is one where the most intrinsically competent are given or earn all the goods and honors since they are more likely to produce seminal works with them. A meritocrat holds a somewhat softer position than a perfectionist, since they hold that competence and contribution may not be related to intrinsic qualities but must be determined by the democracy of the market and consumers. A perfectionist is usually more skeptical that the average consumer possesses the aptitude to know what constitutes a truly worthy contribution, since they lack an account of what is intrinsically valuable. While the specifics are often vague, perfectionists are often
                                      - 202 -
content with a degree of state redistribution to allocate resources to the most impressive, even if that means inhibiting market outcomes.
What these positions share is a belief that inequalities between individuals can be justified if they result from either intrinsic or economically significant difference in people’s competence. For a capitalist meritocrat, the more effective contributors will rise in conditions of perfect competition, and this is justifiable based on what they contributed to consumers. For the perfectionist, the more intrinsically competent should be given the resources needed to make their contributions, regardless of what even the market and its consumers want. In their more moderate forms, these positions remind us that focusing simply on human incapacity can be a barrier to respecting human excellence and what it takes to achieve that. At their worst, these kinds of positions display an ugly elitism which many would find not just hard to swallow, but self-aggrandizing and clownish. Ayn Rand’s denigration of the mass of humankind as mere second-handers or parasites is representative here.59 Distilled into its purest form the arguments for meritocracy and perfectionism take this form. The first is that the majority of individuals benefit from a system that rewards the competent, since this encourages innovation and drive on the part of those with a lot to give. The second is that those who are more competent deserve more because they either committed superior efforts, had superior skills and talents, or are intrinsically better or committed to superior values.
The first objection is more convincing than the perfectionist one in a variety of different ways. The perfectionist theory of intrinsic competence and seminal contribution has to commit itself to a philosophically ambitious theory of the good or the beautiful, and then has to make the further argument that this theory is sufficiently powerful that distributional outcomes should turn on it. I am very skeptical any such theory could succeed in an increasingly pluralistic society, characterized by deep disagreements on the good and the beautiful. This is not because I do not believe that one can develop better or worse theories of intrinsic competence and seminal contribution, or even that we should celebrate wide
59 Not to mention ironic given Rand’s own propensity to take aid from others, never pay it back,
and none the less insist on her own intrinsic superiority.
                                      - 203 -disagreements on these issues. But any such theory would have to answer a host of Berlinian objections that there appear to be a host of competences and contributions one could pursue throughout life, and these are often coded in very culturally diverse ways even if-circa figures like Jung-it turns out that various peoples actually pursue the same competences and achievements in different symbolically coded ways. The perfectionist theory not only has to say what counts as intrinsic competence and contributions, but then to rank these and assign distributional shares on that basis. Even if one could generate a robust set of intrinsically valuable competences and contributions which would be unobjectionable at the theoretical level, the practical matter of deciding who should get what on the basis would likely produce intense disagreement based on technical disputes about how to rank and reward, say, producing a great work of music against developing a viable vaccine for COVID 19. Many might also object to this argument from a libertarian perspective, contending that the degree of state intervention which would be necessary to reward the intrinsically worthy would interfere substantially with economic liberty.60
By contrast the capitalist meritocrat has a ready at hand answer to these problems. She can claim to be neutral on the question of which competences and contributions are intrinsically valuable, or even to support a comprehensive theory but recognizes the technical problems with instituting it. From their perspective the market solves both problems by rewarding individuals on the basis of the competences and contributions they supply as determined by consumer demand. While the market may reward people imperfectly, for instance making millionaires of pornogra-phers and pulp fiction writers while a true artist struggles to find an audience, this imperfection is less severe than some perfectionists might object since at the very least consumers reward utility maximizers since their contribution clearly makes people happy. It also incentivizes further economic activity, improving the quality of life for all in the medium to long
60 This objection is of course readily directed against my own position, but I have already explored why I do not think it is convincing. However, the libertarian argument might resonate when directed against the perfectionist since the latter’s emphasis is on being rewarded for one’s intrinsic competences and contributions developed through free actions. My own position ignores such issues to focus on establishing the fair conditions for all to engage in dignified self-authorship.
                                      - 204 -
run. Finally, the capitalist meritocrat can also claim their approach improves on the perfectionist since they have no need to appeal to state authority to allocate distributional shares, since it is the free actions of individuals on the market which determine outcomes. While this may well be imperfect-Hayek himself acknowledges that in a free market context some unmeritorious individuals may get ahead-it is also far better than alternative
The argument against these positions and for a right to equal expressive capabilities begins by appealing to the moral equality of all individuals. What the capitalist meritocrat and perfectionist share is the conviction that some individuals deserve to have more than others, whether because they have contributed more and been rewarded by the market or because they are simply intrinsically superior. But I do not think either is a sufficiently strong argument to justify the vast disparities in distributional shares we see in the world today. Following Rawls, this is because we need to recognize that in many respects differences in competence emerge for reasons which are wholly arbitrary from a moral point of view. Individuals no more worked to have the natural talents which enabled them to get ahead than those born poor deserved to have a significant handicap imposed on their initial starting conditions in life. This seriously troubles the perfectionist claim that some are simply intrinsically better than others. While that may be true in terms of their competence, it does not imply a moral superiority since the intrinsically talented often did little to merit their gifts and advantages. Much as those born untalented or with few opportunities to refine their talents can be blamed or condemned for the failure to be born with the winning qualities. The perfectionist argument leans on a morally abstract understanding of intrinsic worth which ignores the circumstances surrounding and determining a person’s life in order to rank them according to a narrow set of intrinsic competences and contributions which the perfectionist takes to be the only relevant consideration. The capitalist meritocrat is not so vulnerable to these objections since, as mentioned, they might respond that they are not engaging in the moral ranking of individuals. Instead they are simply arguing that the market must decide who and what to reward to increase wealth and enable freedom. However this argument ignores the third dimension of Rawls’ positions about moral arbitrariness, which is to turn
                                      - 205 -the argument of the market meritocrat on its head. If it is the case that the market rewards individuals in a morally arbitrary way which has nothing to do with the intrinsic worth of their competences and contributions, we should seriously ask whether we must necessarily tolerate the vast disparities in distributional shares which emerge. Put another way if people get ahead simply because they happen to have been lucky enough to satisfy consumer demand, we should ask why those who were not so fortunate should be left in the cold simply because amoral market mechanisms dictated such. The response in those cases would be to appeal to both the inherent virtues of economic freedom and the need for incentives to promote growth. But I have already discussed why the kind of economic freedom cherished by market dogmatists isn’t that compelling since it tells us little about why freedom is valuable to many individuals. Once that question is posed, I think we can see why the kind of freedom offered by my argument for dignified self-authorship secured by the two rights is more appealing. I will respond to the question of retaining incentives in more detail below. Before focusing on this I have to highlight how realizing a right to an equality of expressive capabilities differs from other egalitarian arguments.
Since the publication of Theory of Justice in 1971 there have been an incredible panorama of different egalitarian theories put forward with varied emphases and models of rights attached to them. This to be commended for indicating that a variety of different political and legal theorists are attracted to a more egalitarian distribution of the sort which would help amplify human dignity. There are usually two dimensions to specifying what form of egalitarianism a figure supports. The first is what kind of principles should be adopted to specify distributional shares. And the second is what constitutes a distributional share; or in Norman Daniels helpful terminology, “equality of what?”
Many of us have egalitarian concerns. To some extent, that is, at some cost, we prefer a world in which goods—powers, liberties, opportunities, wealth, health—are more equally distributed to one in which they are not. At least to some extent, we are willing to forego delivering a greater benefit to someone who is already better off in order to deliver a lesser benefit to someone who is worse off. Whether we are strictly concerned with equality
                                      - 206 -
or merely with giving priority to the claims of those who are worse off, we
face the question: What is the ultimate target of our egalitarian concerns?61
Different theorists adopt different principles along each dimension. Rawls position remains the most famous. The principles of justice as fairness requires that social and economic inequalities work to the benefit of the least well off. In answer to what constitutes a distributional share, Rawls argues for greater equality of resources subject to the aforementioned qualifications. Ronald Dworkin differs with Rawls on the principles which should be adopted for assigning distributional shares, preferring to ground his argument in the ideal of equal respect and framing his argument in terms of an insurance scheme. But he agrees with Rawls that distributional shares should be framed in terms of equality of resources. Some egalitarian theorists disagree with this focus on resources, often arguing it is too abstracted from the concrete needs of actual individuals. G.A Cohen adopted various Marxist arguments about ownership on one’s labor to argue that the inequalities found in modern capitalist societies were predicated on serious exploitation. He then deepened the Marxist position ala the tools of contemporary analytical philosophy to argue that we must also look at how misfortune, including in tastes and personality, generate inequities which cannot be justifiably permitted. He therefore argues for a species of welfare egalitarianism, where individuals would enjoy more or less similar qualities of life based on their unique needs and abilities. Utilitarian and consequentialist theorists also tend to agree for some form of greater equality of welfare, but in this case appeal to a more stringent application of the principle of utility or the need to achieve optimific outcomes to justify more equal distributive shares. Peter Singer and Derek Parfit are two well-known figures in this regard. They also differ from Cohen in many respects, particularly Singer. Singer contends that sine we are concerned with aggregate overall utility, this brings up the concerning risk that some individual’s welfare could be acceptably traded off to improve another’s if the trade-off is sufficiently rational.
61 Norman Daniels. “Equality of What?: Welfare, Resources, or Capabilities?” Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research, Vol I, 1990 at pg 273.
                                      - 207 -Discussing the strengths and weaknesses of each of these positions goes well beyond the purview of this book. Instead I will try to highlight why I think equality of capabilities better captures what is essential in the egalitarian outlook. Equality of resources as argued for by Rawls and Dworkin remains too committed to a liberal outlook abstracted from distinct visions of the good life and what is required to achieve them. For all its reactionary flaws, Finnis’ critiques in this sense are sound: one can’t simply contend that all that is required to pursue the good life is resources and honors when often times the challenges individuals face lie in more subtle barriers.62 Dworkin may contend that is it precisely this abstraction which explains the appeal of equality of resources relative to its competitors; it is not committed to making supremely complex and detailed judgements about what is need to secure the flourishing of each individual life. It rests content with tailoring a package of resources for each individual guided by a desire to show them equal respect. But this leaves equality of resources seriously open to the criticism that it cannot address how to establish equal conditions for those who do not need things, but social changes in order to lead lives of dignified authorship. A clear example would be the need for handicapped individuals for urban and rural spaces to be organized to ensure their mobility. Simply providing them with compensatory resources would not be sufficient in this regard; indeed it runs the risk of buying them off with goods rather than taking the necessary steps to develop spaces which would be accessible to all. Equality of welfare seems more sensitive to this problem, insisting that it is not enough to simply give people resources but that they must enjoy equal well-being in every respect. But here I do accept the contention of the liberal theorists that we get into relentlessly opaque realms well beyond what any political or legal system could actually address. A state which had to insulate or compensate for every failing which occurred in each individual’s personal life, tailoring policy to their specific needs, would be intensely intrusive and utterly efface anyone’s potential for free action. More importantly for my purposes, such a state could never be democratic since its obligations would be so intensive that the exercise of
62 John Finnis. Natural Law and Natural Rights: Second Edition. (Oxford, UK. Oxford University
Press, 2011).
                                      - 208 -
civic and other forms of freedom-especially those which were valuable to individuals but not necessarily to other subjects of egalitarian concern-would be radically subordinated to the imperative to achieve equal welfare for all. While it is imperative to ask what freedom is for rather than simply resting on it as an unimpeachable ideal such a context would seriously undermine the dignity of individuals by constraining their capacity to be self-authors in any meaningful sense. Instead they would effectively be the subjects of a system which provided for their every means while ordering virtually every element of their lives; something more in the vein of Aldous Huxley than Gene Rodenberry or Isaac Asimov.
An equality of expressive capabilities captures what is best in both the resourcist and the welfarist accounts of distributive shares, being linked to a principled argument for the advancement of human dignity. Like the resourcist account, it relates equality of capabilities very tightly to an account of freedom, defined here as the capacity for self-authorship. However, it does not give into the liberal impulse to abstractly focus on a bundle of resources to be supplied to each individual, but rather emphasizes individual’s overall capacity within their social-historical context. This means that states must take steps to not just provide and individual with material goods and services, but actively seek to reform those socio-historical contexts to the extent they inhibit individuals. This may indeed take the form of transfers in wealth, providing social services and so on. Or it may take the form of developing urban spaces which are accessible to those with serious physical disabilities, ensuring equal access to job opportunities and honors for traditionally marginalized peoples, securing meaningful access to the justice system for those from a limited educational background,63 or implementing sound policies to gradually corrode exploitative or patriarchal traditions which inhibit some from leading
63 A variety of empirically minded socio-legal scholars have observed how access to the justice system is inhibited by a wide variety of factors; and not just money. Education, dispositions towards the legal system, whether one suspects accessing it may be more trouble than simply “lumping” one’s problems are all prominent examples. Much of this is not captured by the formalism of liberal legalism. For some prominent examples of texts engaging this problem see Patricia Ewick and Susan Silbey. 7The Common Place of Law: Stories From Everyday Life. (Chicago, IL. University of Chicago Press, 1998) and Sally Engle Merry. Getting Justice and Getting Even: Legal Consciousness AmongWorking-ClassAmericans. (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1990).
                                      - 209 -truly dignified lives.64 'ttis analytical and moral flexibility and holism make a focus on expressive capabilities more useful than the resourcist approach, while linking it to an ideal of human dignity which would be readily palatable to figures like Rawls and Dworkin. A focus on expressive capabilities should also be acceptable to some figures who focus on equality of welfare since it goes further than the resourcist approach to look at not just what individuals have, but the outcomes for their overall capacity for self-authorship. In this sense it is more oriented by how meaningful a distributive scheme is in improving the welfare of all relevant moral subjects. But an equality of expressive capabilities also doesn’t go to the extreme demanded by the logic of welfarist claims, wherein even the personal choices and tastes of individuals can be subject to consequentialist calculations and state control. It also takes more seriously the differences between individuals ignored by commentators like Singer, whose philosophy, as mentioned, is open to the serious objection that it would enable tradeoffs for the sake of increasing aggregate utility which would have negative impacts on many. This would violate individual’s rights to self and democratic authorship discussed above, and would be unacceptable to any account which emphasizes that the dignity of all, not simply the majority, must be a matter of concern.
Expressive capabilities capture both the egalitarian impetus to treat individuals as moral equals while also gesturing to the liberal emphasis on liberty through the link to dignified self-authorship. In terms of how to concretize what is means by expressive capabilities and emphasizing which should be the most immediate concern, the provisional list
64 A good example was given by Martha Nussbaum in her work on creating capabilities. She refers to the Indian province of Kerala, which is one of the poorest in the country and which has high levels of gender inequality. The government initially sought ameliorate this through simply providing low income families with money to send their daughters to school. This proved unsuccessful given the limitations to enforcement mechanisms, and many parents simply took the money and sent their female children to labour in the textile industry. The government’s response was to instead offer girls a 600-calorie meal for attending school for several hours a day. It ended up working since the parents now had two incentives to educate their daughters. This demonstrates how the capability oriented approach can be more flexible than the resourcist model, which limits itself to ensuring everyone has an equal bundle of resources. Whether those resources actually make a meaningful difference in people’s lives isn’t a matter it is as readily attentive to as Sen, Nussbaum and others are. See Martha Nussbaum. Creating Capabilities: 7The Human Development Approach. (Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2011).
                                      - 210 -
developed by Nussbaum and discussed in the section above seems reasonable. Nussbaum’s list emphasizes the need to secure the material goods and access to services needed to avoid destitution, the importance of forming meaningful relations with others and exercising practical reason and the imagination via access to education and higher order opportunities, draws attention to our relationship with the environment and nonhuman animals, and even highlights the need for political engagement-a subject already discussed while arguing for the right to democratic authorship. The most substantial deviation to Nussbaum’s list is my insistence that being capable of controlling one’s environment entails going beyond liberal politics and insisting that institutions which have typically been relegated to the private sphere, such as the workplace and family, must also be politicized by making individuals capable of controlling such environments as democratic equals. Where my position differs from Nussbaum and Sen more substantially is vin framing the capabilities approach in terms of rights discourse and linking that to an argument for a more radical and egalitarian democracy generally. It would not permit substantial differences in the set of expressive capabilities individuals enjoy beyond those subject to two qualifications.
The first qualification is that inequalities in expressive capabilities are permissible if they flow from the morally significant choices of individuals. This qualification is important since subjecting the morally significant choices to distributive calculations would open the door to the kind of exceedingly interventionist political order already criticized above when discussing equality of welfare. While a political order committed to equality of expressive capabilities would already be far more active than we currently see in rectifying inequalities, it would permit differences when these are the result of non-arbitrary choices made by individuals-including those that are deliberately assumed. What this means is that inequalities should not be the result of arbitrary factors65 significantly
65 These factors are sometimes referred to as background condition which precede choices. I am uncomfortable with this terminology for a variety of reasons. The most significant is that is assumes that choice is the primary defining characteristic of personhood, which other integral features being of less significance from a moral point of view. I do not think this is true since these factors often become the material through which we define ourselves in a process of self-authorship. This does not mean they should not be subject to political criticism and rectification in line with what I am talking about, but only that granting them a lesser ontological status appears inappropriate. See
                                      - 211 -beyond the control of a reasonable person: such as their race, gender or sexual identity and orientation, natural competence or lack of competence, initial class background, religious, ethnic or racial affiliation, or disability and illness. Other arbitrary factors include the fortunes and misfortunes of nature, being subject to deprivation as a result of economic precarity or downturns, and initial geographic location.66What constitute morally significant factors which could lead to permissible inequalities include making considered tradeoffs between different professional ventures which are differentially rewarded, dedicating oneself to abstaining from the pursuit of material goods for religious or cultural reasons,67 democratically determined allocations of power and honors in both politics and historically private institutions, and capitalist meritocratic based accomplishments necessary to incentive economic growth useful to the least well off. This list is not intended to be exhaustive, and no doubt further examples could be added via a more fine-grained exposition. There are also undoubtedly problem circumstances which would have to be addressed in a more comprehensive account of what constitutes arbitrary and morally significant choices: for instance Ronald Dworkin’s extensive analysis of whether and individual who deliberately develops refined and expensive tastes is made less capable when denied them for arbitrary reasons.68 The argument developed here cannot address each of these specific cases one after another, let alone all those which might potentially come up. The general rule is that circumstances are arbitrary to the extent they are beyond the control of a reasonable person; with paradigmatic instances between race, gender and sexual identity,
Lesley Jacobs. Pursuing Equal Opportunities: The Theory and Practice of Egalitarian Justice. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2003).
66 In an earlier work I argued that the model of dignity developed here could theoretically be extended to the international arena as well following the pioneering arguments of figures like Thomas Pogge and Peter Singer. While a crucial question I will not take that up in this book for the sake of brevity. Matthew McManus. Making Human Dignity Central to International Human Rights Law: A Critical Legal Argument. (Cardiff, UK: University of Wales Press, 2019).
67 Sen helpfully refers here to the difference between a child who does have enough food and a religious person who is fasting for reasons of faith. While in both cases the expressive capabilities of the hungry child and the fasting Brahmin are limited, the latter are morally significant since they flow from his choices rather than arbitrary circumstances.
68 Ronald Dworkin. Sovereign Virtue: The Theory and Practice of Equality. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002) at pgs 48—59.
                                      - 212 -
class background and so on. Choices which are not arbitrary are those which a reasonable person has deliberated upon using their practical reason, aware of the potential consequences and benefits of their actions, and committed themselves to in good faith. Penumbral issues such as the development of refined taste occupy a midway point which could be assessed through further philosophical and empirical research on the extent to which we can control such matters.
The second qualification is that inequalities are permissible if they can be shown to work for the benefit of the least well off. This is of course Rawls’ position as well, and my argument for this qualification is largely consonant with his. Where strict egalitarians emphasize the importance of equality exclusively for its own sake, I think one can make a similar argument to those addressed at those who value liberty as an exclusive end in itself. Equality is of tremendous importance because it reflects the importance each individual human being has from a moral point of view. But it is also important because a focus on equality requires us to ask how to ensure each individual has a capacity to engage in dignified selfauthorship as determined by their total set of expressive capabilities. If it is the case that strict equality would prove detrimental to amplifying the set of expressive capabilities for the least well off because this establishes highly limited structures of economic incentivation then it would be an undesirable outcome. Consequently inequalities would be permissible to offset this possibility.
I emphasize that the least well off should be the subject of concern here for variety of reasons. The most important is to emphasize that inequalities are not permissible simply to maximize economic incentives in and of themselves. It could turn out to be the case that a system which permits very great inequalities would be more effective in this respect, even though many or even the majority would lead comparably undignified lives in a flourishing economy. This would not be a dignity respecting society, since only a comparatively narrow group would enjoy the expressive capabilities needed to engage in self-authorship. Insisting that the least well-off are of first concern when it comes to assessing which inequalities are permissible would bar such a possibility, by insisting that any trade off in inequality has to amplify the dignity of those who are most deprived of it in the long run. Another reason relates back to the
                                      - 213 -first right to individual and democratic self-authorship. Negative and social freedom become more significant when individuals are capable of making them meaningfully impactful for their lives: a truth which applies to everything from access to the justice system, to deliberative participation in the public sphere. Leaving the least well of destitute in this respect would seriously compromise their right to self and democratic authorship. Finally, the least well off should be the primary subject of concern for the deontological purposes of being shown equal respect by the political and legal institutions of which they are to be the authors, which in turn legitimates the authority of government. 'tte goods and resources of society are contemporaneously distributed according to “free market” principles, which are actually backed up by a coercive legal system which relentlessly protects the interests of those who are already well off and even insulates them from democratic pressures.69 In the public sphere it is rarely asked why those who benefit the least from such arrangements should feel compelled to acquiesce to a system which rewards the affluent rather than themselves for morally arbitrary reasons. A system which only permits inequalities if they work for the benefit of the least well off turns the emphasis around, by ensuring the law shows equal respect to those who have not benefitted from unequal arrangements thus far will be the primary beneficiaries in the future. This point can be framed in terms of what Lesley Jacobs terms “stakes fairness.” Rather than have a winner take all system guided by the logic of the Matthew principle, we would have one where everyone has a stake in the system since even those who are not as successful will be better off than they would have otherwise been.70
Taken together these two qualifications set limits to how far the egalitarian agenda could be pursued. But they do so in order to respect the individual freedom of individuals by insisting that their morally significant choices go beyond political intervention, while also emphasizing
69 Jessica Whyte. 7The Morals of the Market: Human Rights and the Rise of Neoliberalism. (London, UK: Verso Books, 2019).
70 The real life example given is to a boxing match, where winnings are not just allocated to the victor but to the loser as well. The winner is still permitted to have more, since there needs to be an incentive structure in order to have a competition which will spur economic growth. But the loser benefits from the arrangement almost as much, and more than they would have should the competition not been carried out. See Lesley Jacobs. Pursuing Equal Opportunities: The Theory and Practice of Egalitarian Justice. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2003) at pgs 37Th7.
                                      - 214 -
that the primary beneficiaries of inequality should be the least well off. In practice securing a right to equal expressive capabilities subject to these qualifications would likely take the form of establishing a very robust series of social programs existed to ensure everyone had equal access to developing the same skills prior to entering the workforce. It would permit inequalities to exist in the workforce where these resulted from individual’s choices and to incentivize economic activity. But there would be a serious lid placed on how inequality was permissible since affluence would be required to show that it was the result of an individual’s life decisions and was necessary to help those in need. This would mean the excessive inequalities characteristic of the twenty-first century would disappear as much of the wealth which concentrates at the top would be redistributed to those at the bottom through further social programs ranging from access to public healthcare, education, paid vacations, maternity and paternity care, viable pensions, assistance programs to the less fortunate and disabled, and perhaps even a universal basic income. A further cap would be placed since the workplace would be democratized, putting a serious halt on the capacity of capital to dictate the terms of work and wages. Which blend of policies would be preferable would depend on the socio-historical context and steered by the democratic will of citizens.
The Good of Dignified Self-Authorship
Earlier I indicated that one of the more foundational objections one might make to dignified self-authorship are that it radicalizes the distinction between the right and the good made by many modern liberal theorists. This makes the argument for dignified self-authorship vulnerable to those who object to this distinction, or who argue that any decent society must commit itself to a comprehensive and shared vision of the good life to ensure proper human flourishing and ordered stability. On occasion these objections have an ugly reactionary bent, where the objection seems not so much to the lack of a comprehensive vision of the good life as to the disruptions to hierarchy and distinctions of rank by egalitarian liberal theory. Authors in this genre often do not bother to put forward and
                                      - 215 -defend an account of excellence which would justify existent or desired hierarchies, but simply take for granted the virtue of qualities and statuses they admire. At their worst, figures like T.S Eliot, Leo Strauss, and Jordan Peterson fall into this error.71 More complex figures like Alexis de Tocqueville Alasdair MacIntyre, and Peter Lawler raise more serious versions of this objection by not only putting forward a comprehensive theory of the good life which should be shared by all, but also diagnosing how a lack of such a theory contributes to the ennui of modernity. In this section I will briefly respond to these more interesting critics by showing how a life of dignified self-authorship would indeed be a good life.
De Tocqueville was amongst the most perceptive critics of liberalism concerned that its egalitarianism would gradually corrode a shared comprehensive account of the good. This was in part because the democratic form liberalism was taking was one where distinctions of excellence were gradually being corroded in practice. Democratic societies like the early United States were characterized by subjects who objected to the very notion that some individuals were better than others and warranted emulation because of their abilities and accomplishments. While De Tocqueville admired this democratic ethos in so far as it agitated against superstition and anachronistic hierarchies, he was deeply concerned that carried too far this would lead to a culture which embraced mediocrity and sought to tear down anyone who aspired to more than the middling standards available to all.72 He also detected an even more foundational flaw, well elaborated on by Patrick Deneen, which was that the desire for ever greater equality and even freedom from circumstance would necessitate the emergence of an intensive state which would assume responsibility for the lives of its citizens.73 Living and struggling would become a chore from which people demanded relief, ultimately gutting their capacity to accomplish truly challenging ends which give life and freedom meaning.
71 This outlook has been well criticized by Corey Robin in his work on conservatism. See Corey Robin. 7The Reactionary Mind Second Edition: Conservatism from Edmund Burke to Donald Trump. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2018).
72 Alexis de Tocqueville. Democracy in America and Two Essays on America. (London, UK: Penguin Classics, 2003).
73 Patrick Deneen. Why Liberalism Failed. (New Haven, CN: Yale University Press, 2018) pgs 61—62.
                                      - 216 -
These sociological ruminations were given greater specificity in the discourse on modernity by the time Max Weber was writing. His fears of a rationalistic state governed by specialists without souls and sensualists without spirit has long inspired trepidation in everyone from liberal conservatives to Marxist cultural theorists. Weber was also the most important social theorist who defined modern liberal societies as predicated on a focus on means rather than ends. This is related back to the conceptions of justice underpinning them, which follow the legal-rational structure of authority in focusing on processes-procedural justice-rather than substantive outcomes. MacIntyre puts a more distinctively Aristotelian spin on this gloomy Weberian narrative in arguing that the distinction between means and ends ignores the warnings of teleological theorists going back to Aristotle and Aquinas, who emphasized the key role that an end or telos plays in providing meaning for human life. It does this by defining the “goods of excellence” which one must continually aspire to achieve in different spheres of life. For Macintyre, the standards associated with goods of excellence emerge in the practices of our respective traditions. Because liberal and democratic societies have gradually corroded the traditions which framed goods of excellence, modern and now post-modern individuals are left adrift without a sense of what they should aspire to. This even has a corrosive effect on their capacity to engage in selfauthorship, since a life without an end can never come into existential focus the way it must. In such cases the only alternatives we have are a return to Aristotle or an apocalyptic embrace of Nietzschian will to power. As MacIntyre puts it in the justly famous conclusion to After Virtue:
It is always dangerous to draw too precise parallels between one historical period and another; and among the most misleading of such parallels are those which have been drawn between our own age in Europe and North America and the epoch in which the Roman Empire declined into the Dark Ages. Nonetheless certain parallels there are. A crucial turning point in that earlier history occurred when men and women of good will turned aside from the task of shoring up the Roman imperium and ceased to identify the continuation of civility and moral community with the maintenance of that imperium. What they set themselves to achieve instead-often not recognizing fully what they were doing- was the construction of new
                                      - 217 -forms of community within which the moral life could be sustained so that both morality and civility might survive the coming ages of barbarism and darkness. If my account of our moral condition is correct, we ought also to conclude that for some time now we too have reached that turning point. What matters at this stage is the construction of local forms of community within which civility and the intellectual and moral life can be sustained through the new dark ages which are already upon us. And if the tradition of the virtues was able to survive the horrors of the last dark ages, we are not entirely without grounds for hope. This time however the barbarians are not waiting beyond the frontiers; they have already been governing us for quite some time. And it is our lack of consciousness of this that constitutes pan of our predicament. We are waiting not for a Godot, but for another-doubtless very different-St.Benedict.74
There is much to admire in this argument; De Tocqueville, Weber, MacIntyre and others are to be praised for their depth of insight and unique way of framing the problems of modern life. The key to rejecting their arguments is to recognize their reactive quality to these same problems. There is a sense in which each author can only consider a postliberal era as some kind of return to an earlier and more foundational wisdom. Insufficient attention is given to the Hegelian point that liberalism emerged in no small part because these earlier and more foundational forms of wisdom turned out to be deeply inadequate in both theory and practice. The aristocratic pursuit of excellence foundational to the preliberal societies which De Tocqueville nostalgically mused on denied almost all of their members the opportunities to lead lives of flourishing. If democratic mediocrity emerged as a consequence, it would still constitute a vast improvement on mass deficiency, aristocratic pomp masquerading as excellence, and a few great works flowing from the pens of the comfortable classes. If tradition oriented reason feel apart that is because there never has been a tradition oriented reason until very recently. MacIntyre misses the key point that Aristotle at St. Thomas understood their work and world very differently than their contemporary cheerleaders would. Few things would be more foreign to the dynamic Greek mind
74 Alasdair MacIntyre. After Virtue- A Study in Moral Theory: Third Edition (Notre Dame, IN:
University of Notre-Dame Press, 2007) at pg 263.
                                      - 218 -
that the idea of returning to earlier and binding traditions, much like the Scholastics would be horrified at the reduction of their grand rationalizing enterprises to some iteration of “this is what believe because it is what he have always believed.” Moreover the idea that an intrinsic telos can be set by a tradition would gut the metaphysical foundation on which their immense ontotheological systems operated, and merely historicize and socialize ultimately relativistic standards of the good life. It is by no means clear why we should take the goods of excellence established in our traditions to be any more convincing than another’s; much like only a fool would take her chosen pursuits and life goals to be worthwhile to all. There needs to be a more substantial grounding for an account of the good life: such as that provided by human dignity.
Saying that it is important to stress that dignified self-authorship and society organized by the twinned rights would indeed be a good life and society. It would provide a sense of meaning to its members which goes beyond what we find in liberal societies. This is because of its renewed emphasis on the importance of social freedom and participation, in line with the longstanding republican tradition going back to the Greeks and Romans. People enjoying lives of dignified authorship would be capable of not only enjoying individual prosperity and power, but forming less alienated attachments and relations to others. Contemporary neoliberal societies are characterized by an approach to liberty stressing merely economic freedom, while granting few opportunities for individuals to interact with one another beyond the competitive sphere of the market. In these circumstances political power is associated with economic clout, denying the vast majority substantial opportunities to exercise social freedom; sometimes by design ala the anti-democratic inclinations of Hayek. By contrast a democratic polity where individuals are authors of the laws which govern them could be characterized by deliberative efforts to convince and cooperate with others in framing the laws which govern them. As far back as Pericles this was recognized to be a very great good, since it ensured that the people were not passive subjects of authority or-worse-tyranny-but active citizens invested in affairs of state. Such a life has significant meaning in enabling the exercise of higher expressive capacities on issues of general importance beyond the individual self. This also required individuals to take an interest in lives beyond themselves, since
                                      - 219 -they were required to dialogically interact with one another in a process of persuasion. Philosophers from Rawls through Habermas and Charles Taylor have stressed that this would help ameliorate the atomism and anomie characteristic of modernity and post-modernity. It would also facilitate greater cross-cultural understanding, as individuals would have to translate their embedded convictions on moral issues in language which was accessible to all; to express them in terms understandable to “public reason” as Rawls would put it. Such exposure to the broader panorama of experiments in living which characterizes human diversity would be a great good, and enable individuals more substantial options in determining the course of their individual and social dignified self-authorship.
Moreover, as authors as diverse as Immanuel Kant and Frank Meyer have pointed out, there is a strong argument to be made that freedom is a prerequisite for living the good life.75 This is because it is only uncoerced decisions to act in a morally admirable way which have genuine worth. The problem with traditionalist accounts of the good life is they neglect to analyze the ways forms of micro-power and oppression can operate to quash individual’s capacity for freedom, which would water down the moral worth of their actions even if the consequences were beneficial.76 Figures like MacIntyre miss how one man’s venerable tradition may well be another’s oppressive hegemony; determining which is which cannot be made through judgements made using the internal resources of tradition focused reason. The freedom associated with adopting an external and reflective standpoint on what constitutes the genuine good life, and cannot be achieved in contexts where breaking from tradition is presented as impossible or radically undesirable. This is where the second right to dignified self-authorship facilitates pursuit of the good life. By ensuring all individuals enjoy the material prosperity to reflect and choose which lives they wish to live, in cooperation and deliberation with others, they are in a position to take a reflective distance
75 Frank S Meyer. In Defense of Freedom and Related Essays: With A Foreword by William C. Dennis. (Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Fund, 1996).
76 As theorized on by Foucault. See Michel Foucault. The Birth of Biopolitics: Lectures at the College De France 1978—1979, trans. Graham Burchell. (New York, NY: Picador, 2008) and Michel Foucault. The Foucault Reader, ed. Paul Rabinow. (New York, NY: Pantheon Books, 1984).
                                      - 220 -
from the authority of tradition and remake it as they see fit. This would be especially important for groups such as women, marginalized ethnic and racial groups, and members of the LGBTQ community whose conformity to tradition stemmed in no small part because of the intersectional economic precarity they found themselves in merely for being who they are.
Conclusion: The Twinned Rights, Human Dignity, and the Creative Evolution of a Good Society through Law
This Chapter has covered a broad array of different arguments and themes while trying to present my more substantive moral argument for human dignity and rights. Taken together the critical legal conception of human dignity and the twinned model of rights sketched in this chapter is meant to accomplish several goals. The first is to go beyond the limitations of liberal rights discourse on the issues of democratic participation and property. This is not to imply that going beyond liberalism is a rejection of its fundamental achievements. Rather I have endeavored to take more seriously the liberal ideal of treating individuals as moral equals though calling for a dignity respecting society committed to enabling the self and democratic authorship of both of its members. To achieve this I have made the contentious argument that one can develop a critical legal model of rights which responds to the many well taken critiques of rights made by the CLS movement. This model of rights was deliberately presented at a relatively high level of abstraction in order to remain sensitive to the various context sensitive ways in which different societies may attempt to realize the model. The right to human dignity, understood as a capacity for dignified self-authorship, serves as a “mother right” from which the principled daughter rights flow. The most key are the twinned rights to individual and democratic self-authorship and to an equality of expressive capabilities except where qualified by the aforementioned conditions. This model should prove morally appealing to even the hardened skeptics of the critical legal studies movement, who have typically been
                                      - 221 -primed to reject anything that smacks of rights discourse on the basis that it is too close to an apologia for liberal capitalism. While I think there are important concessions critical legal scholars should make to the liberal tradition-indeed, it is difficult to think of a distinctively Western progres-sivism which does not owe a serious debt to liberalism-there is no to adopt an essentializing and totalizing approach to rights when they can be reframed for more left wing causes. If rights discourse can be rethought and put to progressive uses it should be given a hearing even by the most skeptical critical scholar and activist.
However there are two important objections this model of rights might face which come from different directions than the other arguments dissected here. The first would come from the most sophisticated critical legal scholars might raise a higher order objection to the model of rights presented here; ultimately rooted in the pioneering critique of liberalism made by Marx in “On the Jewish Question.”77 This objection would be that, even if desirable, the model of rights presented here could never be realized through the medium of liberal law. 'ttat is because the formalism of liberal legalism reflects its function in preserving the undemocratic and inegalitarian features which have long characterized our societies. I have already addressed some of the ways this critique has been framed, but must respond in a more comprehensive manner. In the following Chapter I am going to discuss how we can rethink the nature of law in a more ontologically dynamic way which would facilitate the kind of participatory self and democratic authorship I have argued for here. To do so I will once more take up the critique of liberal legalism which has so defined the critical legal studies movement. The second objection would likely come from more communitarian sources. They would contend that my argument is largely empty because it does not seriously address the question of what kind of life is good. Or framed in a more MacIntyrean fashion, what ends are worth pursuing. This is a subtle argument which can be framed in a number of different ways. Figures like MacIntyre, Taylor, and Sandel may well approve the contention that self-authorship is a worthy ideal in life. But they would counter that without providing some
77 Karl Marx. “On the Jewish Question” in Early Writings, trans. Rodney Livingstone. (London,
UK: Penguin Classics, 1992).
                                      - 222 -
account of the good ends which individuals should pursue, it is a hollow pursuit. Self-authorship can never come into focus because it is never directed to some goal which goes beyond individual and context transcendence, and so risks becoming a mere rejection of the status quo for its own sake.78 Emancipation cannot just be freedom from, but also needs to be freedom for, or to put it in Hegelese, we need to move from living in ourselves and move to living for ourselves. I will respond to this argument in the final Chapter of the book, where I talk about how dignified self-authorship in cooperation with others would be a good life. I will also discuss how it could counter some of the more noxious effects of post-modern culture on individual subjectivity: in particular facilitating the emergence of reactionary movements like post-modern conservatism discussed in my earlier books.79 This will round out the project of going beyond liberal rights while responding to the many critics of liberalism which have emerged over the years.
78 Some critical legal theorists have been sensitive to this objection. See Allan Hutchinson. “A Poetic Champion Composes: Unger (Not) on Ecology and Women” University of Toronto Law Journal, Vol 40, 1989.
79 Matthew McManus. The Rise of Post-Modern Conservatism: Neoliberalism, Post-Modern Culture, and Reactionary Politics. (Gewerbestrasse, SW: Palgrave Macmillan, 2019) and Matthew McManus. What is Post-Modern Conservatism: Essays on Our Hugely Tremendous Times. (Winchester, UK: Zero Books, 2019).

 5
Rethinking the Ontology of Law and Rights on Critical Legal Lines
Establishing the Rule of Law
Legal theory has a long and esteemed history in many different traditions. Confucianism and legalism have had a tremendous impact on Chinese legal traditions to this day, as have the rich and complex ruminations of scholars interpreting the Sunna of Islamic law. In a European context, legal theory has deep roots in the thinking of natural law theorists in Greece and Rome, who in turn inspired Scholastic ruminations by figures like Augustine and Aquinas who distinguished between various forms of obligation set by worldly authorities, natural morality, and the state. The liberal legal tradition has already been discussed at some length in Chap. 1. Beginning with Grotius, given systematic weight by Locke, Hobbes, Kant and others, and finally reaching a peak of technical precision with the emergence of analytical legal theory starting with Austin in the nineteenth century. Liberalism has appealed to many different forms of legalism throughout this history, from natural law theory, Burkeanism and Straussianism, many species of legal positivism, deontological proce-duralism, originalism, and law as integrity in the work of Ronald Dworkin. Many of these forms of liberal legalism have made rights
                                      - 223 -M. McManus, A Critical Legal Examination of Liberalism and Liberal Rights, Palgrave Studies in Classical Liberalism, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61025-8_5
                                      - 224 -
discourse central to their accounts of legal legitimation; though Kant, Hart, Dworkin and others give very different accounts of the relationship between rights and law. This Chapter will only be able to give a brief summary of these myriad differences before presenting my own argument for how law’s ontology should be reconceived on different ontological lines.
The unifying feature of these different species of liberal legalism has been the conviction that the purpose of law is to establish and maintain a static social order in spite of the dynamism implied by liberalism’s endorsement of liberty and transformative capitalism. The major differences arise over whether legal theory is to simply describe or must morally evaluate exiting legal orders, and if the latter, from what perspective can one make relevant judgements. The Scholastic ontotheologies were still sufficiently influential in Grotius’ day so that the order established by human law emulated the deeper divine order latent within existence itself and expressed through natural law. Grotius’ innovation was to argue that reason was sufficiently powerful to independently ascertain and validate the rules of natural law, which meant that human law could be made just even without the religious sanction provided by faith.1 This was an important first step in trying to link law to reason, but it was still unable to dissociate entirely from ontological appeals to justificatory norms which went beyond the creations of human intelligence. Hobbes’ dramatic innovation was to entirely do away with this. He pointed out that the natural order was the warre of all against all, unremitting chaos within which the life of man was solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short. Reason therefore directed us not to emulate nature, but to improve upon it through establishing the artificial mortal God of the legal state. As Patrick Deneen and others have noted, Hobbes’ dramatic argument already generated a strange tension in the heart of liberal doctrine. By dissociating so pronouncedly from appeals to nature and to the artificial legal order backed up by the threat of violence, Hobbes placed the power at the heart of liberal legalisms thinking on authority.2 This would generate a number
1 Hugo Grotius. On the Laws of War and Peace, trans. A.C Campbell. (Kitchener, Ontario: Batoche Books, 2001).
2 Weber’s pioneering ruminations about the distinction and links between power and authority are very helpful here. See Max Weber. Economy and Society, trans. Keith Tribe. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2019).
                                      - 225 -of exceptionally strange and even contradictory inner tendencies as various liberal legal doctrines emerged. Without being able to appeal to the authority of nature to mitigate the human potential for self-destruction, liberal theorists had to accept the need for power to be located in the state authorities in order to maintain order. At the same time the dissociation of morality from nature became associated with demands for ever more radical freedom from every form of natural contingency and from state authorities themselves. This was framed in terms of the large number of rights which individuals enjoyed in relation to each other and to the state. By the time of the nineteenth century this reached the point where many wanted a larger and more interventionist state to exercise legal authority to liberate them from the limitations imposed by our animal nature through the establishment of social democratic and socialist welfare states. Naturally this also took the form of demanding further rights; including the ones argued for in this very book. This is a very serious tension in liberal doctrines since it requires authority to be backed up by coercive power to effectively establish order, while at the same time insisting that individuals must be free of both authority and nature. From Hobbes onwards most liberal legal theorists did not confront the problem, but instead sought to evade it by suggesting that real freedom could only come from submission to the law. The American Founders’ republican aristocracy, Kant’s insistence on the good will submitting to the categorical imperative and the laws of the liberal state, and even libertarian acceptance of the night watchman state to protect property all embody efforts to deal with the tension. Perhaps no one articulated the position better than Blackstone in his Commentaries on the Laws of England.
absolute rights of man, considered as a free agent, endowed with discernment to know good from evil, and with power of choosing those measures which appear to him to be most desirable, are usually summed up in one general appellation, and denominated the natural liberty of mankind. This natural liberty consists properly in a power of acting as one thinks fit, without any restraint or control, unless by the law of nature; being a right inherent in us by birth, and one of the gifts of God to man at his creation,
                                      - 226 -
when he endued him with the faculty of free will. But every man, when he enters into society, gives up a part of his natural liberty, as the price of so valuable a purchase; and, in consideration of receiving the advantages of mutual commerce, obliges himself to conform to those laws, which the community has thought proper to establish. And this species of legal obedience and conformity is infinitely more desirable than that wild and savage liberty which is sacrificed to obtain it. For no man that considers a moment would wish to retain the absolute and uncontrolled power of doing whatever he pleases: the consequence of which is, that every other man would also have the same power, and then there would be no security to individuals in any of the enjoyments of life. Political, therefore, or civil liberty, which is that of a member of society, is no other than natural liberty so far restrained by human laws (and no farther) as is necessary and expedient for the general advantage of the public.3
My purpose in this section will not be to undermine the claim that there need to be limitations imposed on freedom in order to make other freedoms meaningful. As the saying goes my right to wave my fist where I want ends where your nose begins. And I have already discussed in some detail why arguments for a minimal state or anarchy would be unattractive, since the kind of freedom we want to enjoy would be dignified selfauthorship rather than mere non-coercion. However, the limitations on self and democratic authorship posed by an account of legality focused on the need to maintain order are still highly problematic. This is especially since, contra Blackstone’s sunny vision of the laws of England, in practice many liberal states have not lived up even to their own principles let alone the loftier goals presented through this book. As analyzed by generations of critical and socio-legal scholars, law has often been used as a tool to entrench anti-democratic mechanisms which benefit the
3 William Blackstone. Commentaries on the Laws of England in Four Books. Online Library of Liberty, April 13th 2016. https://oll.libertyfund.org/pages/blackstone-on-the-absolute-rights-of-individuals-1753.
                                      - 227 -powerful, whether they be the propertied class,4 a privileged race5 or gender,6 and even heteronormativity7 while claiming to simply be upholding a neutral liberal order. This is not just a bug in the system. The liberal fascination with maintaining both order and liberty, moral equality and stratification, stems precisely from privileging its own normative commitments over others, necessitating the use of state power to inhibit potentially radical social change.8 To be successful my critical legal conception of human dignity and model of rights will need to be married to a more flexible and dynamic understanding of legality than liberalism. I will present my sketch of such an understanding in the concluding sections of this Chapter, drawing on helpful dynamic ontologies presented in the work of figures like Henri Bergson and Gilles Deleuze. Before this, it is necessary to show how the liberal fascination with order demonstrates yet another limitation to liberalism which needs to be overcome.
Liberal Legalism in Montesquieu
There is no doubt that the paradigmatic liberal theory of law was presented by Montesquieu. Indeed the good Baron’s work has been so influential that generations of schoolchildren-myself included!-were taught that his remarkable tripartite division of government branches was not
4 Michael Mandel. The Charter of Rights and the Legalization of Politics in Canada. (Toronto, ON: Thomspson Educational Publishing, 1994) and Sally Engle Merry. Getting Justice and Getting Even: Legal Consciousness Among Working-Class Americans. (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1990).
5 Constance Backhouse. Colour-Coded: A Legal History of Racism in Canada. (Toronto, ON: University of Toronto Press, 1999) Corey Robin. The Enigma of Clarence Thomas. (New York, NY: Metropolitan Books, 2019) Lani Guinier. The Tyranny of the Majority: Fundamental Fairness in Representative Democracy. (New York, NY: Free Press, 1995).
6 Catharine MacKinnon. Towards a Feminist Theory of the State. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1989).
7 Michel Foucault. The History of Sexuality Volume One: An Introduction, trans. Robert Hurley. (New York: Vintage Books, 1980). Lise Gottel. “Queering Law: Not by VriendC Canadian Journal of Law and Society, Vol 17, April 2002 and Judith Butler. Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity (New York, NY: Routledge, 1990).
8 This point was made powerfully by David Dyzenhaus in his pioneering reading of Carl Schmitt and Rawls. See David. Dyzenhaus “Liberalism After the Fall: Schmitt, Rawls, and the Problem of Justification” Philosophy and Social Criticism, Vol 22, 1996.
                                      - 228 -
only morally justified but practically natural to all political systems. While it has been superseded by works of greater sophistication, and remains marred by some unfortunate anachronisms, any effort to understand how liberals attempted to resolve the tension between demanding greater freedom while insulating liberal rights from influence must start with The Spirit of the Laws.
Montesquieu opens his book with a surprisingly short discussion of “laws in general” which he describes as being the “necessary relations arising from the nature of things.”9 He goes on to describe how God has his laws, as does the material world, and even the beasts and makes the surprising claim that law constitutes a set of rules expressed a “fixed and invariable relation.” This is true of relations of justice, which preexist the positive laws of the state. The odd feature of Montesquieu’s reasoning is that, despite law being a rule expressing such unchanging relations, there is a distinct dialectic which exists between natural law and positive law. In the state of nature when humans are governed by natural law, Montesquieu argues there would be strict “equality.” However fear and desire would compel human beings to wish for more, while feelings of attraction and “animal pleasure” at company would lead us to associate. This would put an end to the state of nature and equality, and lead to a state of war. Each society would then establish its own government responsible for passing specific types of positive law. Generally Montesquieu sees this as a positive development, with law now reflecting the “reason” of the government.
This fable on the origins of law is quite telling, as is the formalism of his account of positive law. Montesquieu brushes over an account of the state of nature and its equality, to focus squarely on an account of different forms of government and their respective ways of framing authority and virtue. His reasoning in this respect remains very much focused on what Hart would later call the law as a collection of “secondary” or “power-conferring” rules. Montesquieu has little to say about the relation of justice to positive law early in the book, despite arguing the former is ontologically prior to the latter, beyond ruminating on how government might come together. This is very significant, since the separation of his
9 Charles de Second?t Montesquieu. The Spirit of the Laws, trans. Thomas Nugent. (New York, NY:
Batoche Books, Kitchener, 2001) at pg 18.
                                      - 229 -account of positive law from any transparent normative commitments in the opening of Spirit of the Laws suggests Montesquieu’s theory is more neutral on normative questions than it turns out to be. On the surface he is not concerned with what constitutes a priori natural justice, but only with the forms that a legal system takes dividing government power.
Montesquieu argues that there are three forms of government: republican, monarchial, and despotic. While only the first concerns us directly, the other two are significant for where they offer potential improvements on the republican system. Montesquieu is somewhat odd for modern readers in his seamless blend of descriptive and evaluative analysis in describing the virtues and deficiencies of political forms. At the same time he is admirably modern in efforts to demonstrate impartiality and adopt a stance of social-scientific distance from his subject matter. However, he is very much a classical liberal-with distinctively conservative undertones-in his insistence on what liberty in a democratic setting ought to be. It is certainly not just doing as one wills as an individual, and cannot be a grant of unlimited power to the government. In his inimi-cable phrase, power must be a check to power for a moderate government to emerge which grants its members the liberties which they ought to have.
It is true that in democracies the people seem to act as they please; but political liberty does not consist in an unlimited freedom. In governments, that is, in societies directed by laws, liberty can consist only in the power of doing what we ought to will, and in not being constrained to do what we ought not to will. We must have continually present to our minds the difference between independence and liberty. Liberty is a right of doing whatever the laws permit, and if a citizen could do what they forbid he would be no longer possessed of liberty, because all his fellow-citizens would have the same power.10
'ttere is a distinctively Hobbesian form of reasoning in Montesquieu’s analysis of freedom here, emphasizing the dangers posed by too much liberty on the part of other citizens who also have the same power to do
10 Charles de Secondat Montesquieu. 7The Spirit of the Laws, trans. Thomas Nugent. (New York, NY:
Batoche Books, Kitchener, 2001) at pg 161.
                                      - 230 -
as they wish. And like the cautious Englishman, Montesquieu is clearly keen to limit this power through instituting a society “directed by laws.” But Hobbes fully accepted that the consequence of limitless freedom were sufficient to justify significant limitations on liberty imposed by the sovereign. Contrast the above comment in %e Spirit of the Laws with Hobbes’s far more stark presentation of the problem early in his Leviathan:
And because the condition of Man, (as hath been declared in the precedent Chapter) is a condition of Warre of every one against every one; in which case everyone is governed by his own Reason; and there is nothing he can make use of, that may not be a help unto him, in preserving his life against his enemyes; It followeth, that in such a condition, every man has a Right to every thing; even to one anothers body. And therefore, as long as this naturall Right of every man to everything endureth, there can be no security to any man, (how strong or wise soever he be,) of living out the time, which Nature ordinarily alloweth men to live.11
Montesquieu is not as candid as Hobbes about the need to limit liberty for the sake of static order. Instead he agrees with Blackstone that the real task is to redefine liberty not as simply doing what one wills, but instead what one ought to do within a society with “moderate governments” governed by laws. Naturally his model for such a country is England, where power is firmly divided between the executive, legislative, and judicial branches. He has little time for more democratic republics, which are less free even than monarchies, since governments have limitless power to repress their citizens for the sake of personal plunder and advancement. However, Montesquieu’s anxieties about democracy run deeper than this, since he also chides the better ordered and less despotic Ancient democracies for allowing the people too much control over affairs of state. Their proper role is, at most, selecting their better equipped representatives.
One great fault there was in most of the ancient republics, that the people had a right to active resolutions, such as require some execution, a thing of which they are absolutely incapable. They ought to have no share in the government but for the choosing of representatives, which is within their
11 Thomas Hobbes. Leviathan. (London, UK: Penguin Books, 1982) at pg 106.
                                      - 231 -reach. For though few can tell the exact degree of men’s capacities, yet there are none but are capable of knowing in general whether the person they choose is better qualified than most of his neighbours.12
The general conception of law and rights present in Montesquieu therefore takes on a very familiar form to modern readers. Law’s ontology is rooted in the “relations of things” to each other, and in general expresses “human reason” in its commitment to go beyond natural law and the state of nature in which exists pure “equality” and disorder. Montesquieu’s auspiciously descriptive account of the transition from natural to positive law is formalistic in its focus on the way power is divided for the purposes on maintaining order. This is in and of itself important since it gestures to the priority placed on a legal system existing rather than on what the legal system does. Later in the book, the reason for this comparatively deferential stance towards European law becomes clearer as Montesquieu’s own normative commitments come into sharper relief. Understood properly, the law is committed to the establishment of what has since been termed ordered liberty, though it does not express it in those terms. 'tte point of a system of law is to establish a relatively free society where authority is divided but remains relatively aloof from the citizens will, while allowing them the freedom to do what they ought to do but prohibiting actions which would be immoderate or disruptive. He also accepts that the specific form such an ordered system of law might take will vary widely, depending on everything from customs to the national temperance of a people as determined by geographic climate. 'ttis demonstrates an at times admirably and surprisingly Burkean sensitivity to differences in tradition on Montesquieu’s part, though as with Burke, the end goal of achieving ordered liberty in a variety of settings is always in mind. And at various points Montesquieu is less committed to Burkean pluralism and more Eurocentric in its Fox New worthy insistence that a properly ordered society is one committed to the traditions he himself admires and judges worthy. Consider his rather embarrassing comments about the distinction between Christianity and Islam, seemingly
12 Charles de Secondat Montesquieu. 7The Spirit of the Laws, trans. Thomas Nugent. (New York, NY:
Batoche Books, Kitchener, 2001) at pg 171.
                                      - 232 -
indifferent to the reality of mass colonization and imperialism on the part of his home country.
From the characters of the Christian and Mahometan religions, we ought, without any further examination, to embrace the one and reject the other: for it is much easier to prove that religion ought to humanize the manners of men than that any particular religion is true. It is a misfortune to human nature when religion is given by a conqueror. The Mahometan religion, which speaks only by the sword, acts still upon men with that destructive spirit with which it was founded.13
What makes Montesquieu’s work significant is less its ability to reconcile these competing tensions than the erudition and influence with which they were expressed and glossed over through a variety of different forms of “reasoning” justified under the banner of appealing to reason more generally. Freedom can be reconciled with order if it is framed not as pure independence but only the freedom to do what one “ought” to do under the law. A free state is not one where the people rule themselves democratically, but one where power is firmly checked by power so enabling individual freedom. Neutral legal reason is to be sensitive to difference when assessing the laws of different nations; reflecting on their temperament and customs where necessary. But only to a point. A religious rival can be chastised for engaging in mass imperial projects converting millions at the point of a sword; something European states would never do. Law therefore simultaneously creates the space for ordered liberty while entrenching hierarchical relations under the auspices of evaluative reason even when presenting itself as a mere neutral arbiter of already existent difference. 'ttese tensions are still with us today and testify to the ongoing power of liberal legalism.
13 Charles de Secondat Montesquieu. 7The Spirit of the Laws, trans. Thomas Nugent. (New York, NY: Batoche Books, Kitchener, 2001) at pg 469.
                                      - 233 -The Birth of Modern Legal Positivism with John Austin
In contrast to the transdisciplinary sweep of Montesquieu’s work, Austin is far more recognizably modern in both his tone and laser like focus on a single topic. He is also quite aware of this, castigating earlier authors for a failure to take law seriously as a distinct subject for philosophical analysis without drawing in a panorama of other considerations. Austin’s importance as the founder of analytical jurisprudence rests on his willingness to shed Montesquiean breadth for technical depth and nuance; an accomplishment for which he would be hailed and lampooned through the centuries. But despite its scientific pretensions, Austinian jurisprudence bears the indelible stamp of its time, which was becoming increasingly less reverential of authority and more open to defending liberty as a paramount value. This posed a significant problem for the utilitarian Austin. From Bentham he adopted a strange mixture of theoretical outlooks.14 On the one hand he purported to give a purely descriptive account of how the law operated without appealing to moral judgements. On the other his account of sovereign power as unlimited, even by positive law creations such as rights, aligns well with the Benthamite concern for a state which would be powerful enough to overcome all obstacles to secure the greatest happiness for the greatest number.15 There are few liberal theorists today who would accept such a sweeping characterization. None the less Austin remains important both for his pioneering formulations of Anglo-American positivism and his description of law as a series of commands issuing from an order giving sovereign.
14 He was stricter than Bentham was in insisting that one should separate facts and moral judgements. As we have seen Bentham was willing to conflate the two in some circumstances; for instance arguing that maximizing pleasure and minimizing pain were both psychological explanations of human behavior and could be commandeered as moral principles as well. Austin is unwilling to make these kinds of conflations; insisting that his arguments about supreme sovereign authority are disconnected from his support for utilitarianism. The connection between the two operates at a deeper level.
15 Many have explored the connection between this concern for utility maximization, positivism, and the requirements for a strong state. Some have pointed out that Hobbes’ is an interesting predecessor in this regard. See H.L.A Hart Essays in Jurisprudence and Philosophy. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1984).
                                      - 234 -
In the second of his Lectures, Austin critiques the vagaries of rights discourse, describing appeals to rights on the part of citizens or even the sovereign as empty and meaningless. He then makes a moral aside to claim that the majority of people are far too easily bewitched by such language, while finding the claims of utility maximization put forward by more rational figures “dull.” The purpose of raising these objections is, of course, not to suggest that the basis of all existent positive law is utility. It clearly is not, as Austin highlights in Lecture Three. But exposing the empty mewlings of rights discourse guts the claims of figures who argue that respect for natural rights or what have you is the foundation of law. The real foundation of law, as Hobbes observed centuries before, is power. In particular the power to inflict evil or pain.
Every law or rule (taken with the largest signification which can be given to the term properly) is a command. Or, rather, laws and rules, properly so called are a species of command ... If you express of intimate a wish that I shall do or forebear from some act, and if you will visit me with an evil in case I comply not with your wish, the expression or intimation of your wish is a command. A command is distinguished from other significations of desire, not by the style in which the desire is signified, but by the power and purpose of the party commanding to inflict an evil or pain in case the desire be disregarded.16
Austin then goes on to clarify this position with admirable rigour. A law is a command which obliges a person or persons, and obliges generally by clarifying which acts are permissible or required and which are forbidden. This distinction between generality and specificity is important in distinguishing the power of the sovereign as a command giver from that of any other authority figure in a society. A father, mother, or employer may be able to offer specific commands to their children or laborers in order to achieve their wishes. But the sovereign alone possesses a sufficient “superiority” of power to issue a general command which is obeyed in perpetuity by the entire society. This sovereign is the person or body of persons which is sufficiently powerful so that it can habitually
16 John Austin. The Province of Jurisprudence Determined (and The Uses of the Study of Jurisprudence). (Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing, 1998) at pg 13.
                                      - 235 -expect obedience from by the population, who feel obliged to obey its commands. Each human society has a sovereign. Some sovereigns are more effective at issuing positive laws which are moral such and guided by the principle of utility-particularly on issues of political economy.17 Others are largely driven by abstract and empty concerns, and Austin minces no words when criticizing them. But whether they are guided by rational moral impulses or not is inconsequential, since what determines who or what is the sovereign is their power to be obeyed when issuing commands and the willingness of the subjects to habitually oblige themselves to do so. This accomplishes the goal of organizing society in a rational and ordered manner. Austin contends that most societies remain stable because human beings have a general propensity for preferring order and stability over the possibility of “anarchy.” He then goes on to make the rare move of justifying this investment in order by appealing to the principle of utility.
But though that habitual obedience is partly the consequence of custom, or though that habitual obedience is partly the consequence of prejudices, it partly arises from a reason bottomed in the principle of utility. It partly arises from a perception by the generality or bulk of a community, of the expediency of political government: or (changing the phrase) it partly arises from a preference, by the generality or bulk of the community, of any government to anarchy ... [If] they detest the established government, but ... would change it for another by resorting to resistance, they must travel to their object through an intervening anarchy which they detest more.18
17 It is interesting that Austin’s own theorizations on this issue were so predictably those of a nineteenth century Anglo-American bourgeois theorist. His scathing remarks about the “dull” masses, who have little understanding of political economy via their demands for further rights and care, is indicatory. What makes this unusual is an immediate application of the principle of utility would of course direct a rational calculator to a far more egalitarian distribution of goods than what one found in the highly unequal nineteenth century. The only way to get around this, as I discussed in Chap. 1, is to gradually gut the radicalness of the principle of utility by applying it with little stringency. The consequence being that it becomes little more than a call to be a consequentialist generally.
18 John Austin. The Province of Jurisprudence Determined (and The Uses of the Study of Jurisprudence). (Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing, 1998) at pg 300.
                                      - 236 -
It is easy to criticize this perspective for its staid attachment to habitually static order, which can only be countered through dive into the dangers of anarchy. And indeed Austin does occasionally drift into crank territory in his dogmatic convictions about the transparently obvious tenability of the principle of utility and his insistence that this inherently leads to support for the established order and classical political economy. But there is a more subtle and significant feature to these formulations which testifies to the more subtle association between Austin’s moral and descriptive ambitions. This is that Austin’s positivism is descriptive, but also has a normative assumption built into it-in this case that the “expedience” of any political government, even one that is worthy of being detested, is such that most people would and should obey it. Would obey it because they are being guided by considerations of utility, should obey it because considerations of utility are the basis of genuine morality. As arguments for political legitimacy go this is morally thin, though descriptively accurate. It is undoubtedly true that many choose to obey their governments out of habit, prejudice, and the calculation that even if the sovereign is detestable seeking to overthrow it will be more trouble than it is worth. But mere obedience is not a sign that the state is legitimate, or that acts of civil disobedience and even revolution to change it would be misguided even according to the consequentialist logic of utilitarianism. As Hart, Dworkin and others would wrestle with through the twentieth century, many citizens of Nazi Germany saw fit to acquiesce compliantly to the dictates of their Fuhrer even when he was in the midst of calling for genocidal extinction. In such circumstances individual calculations of utility which incline towards obedience should be no barrier to undertaking acts of resistance necessary to increase overall aggregate utility through the prevention of mass death. This was even true at the time Austin wrote, when the British Empire was using military force to rapidly expand its reach across the globe. Given this Austin should have made a much more robust distinction between the descriptive role played by sovereign power in commanding habitual obedience, and the requirements of subjects to obey as determined through critical application of the principle of utility of some other moral principle. His failure to do so would initially prove influential in narrowing the horizons of legal positivism, with many early proponents assuming that obedience to the law
                                      - 237 -was right and just before proceeding to simply describe its content without evaluating it. This provided the auspices of scientificty to a legal enterprise which should have been far more reflexively self-critical about its own foundations. It would not be until Kelsen, Radbruch and Hart that a significant step forward was taken. Though by that time the reputation of legal positivism, rather unfairly, was sufficiently damaged that a new generation of legal theorists were willing to abandon it for more overtly moral theories.
Positive Law and Rights in H.L.A Hart
Many of Austin’s formulations about sovereignty, power and obedience have been rejected or dramatically updated by more contemporary positivists like Hart and Raz.19 These positivists made similar accusations to the ones formulated above; most notably that Austin is too crude in his characterization of the sovereign lawgiver as a figure with sufficient power to command others and expect obedience. This misses the key question of why a large enough volume of subjects accept the legitimacy of the sovereign’s claim and act to ensure its will is obeyed: a point made most persuasively by H.L.A Hart.20 Contemporary authors like Joseph Raz and Scott Shapiro responded by creating radically different formulations of legal positivism which are about as far away from Austin’s indirect endorsement of a modern order as possible.21 Consequently they also offer many conceptual tools necessary for rethinking how law be reconstructed along more dynamic ontological lines. Contemporary positivism takes the decisive step of dissociating the existence of a legal system and the effort to describe it from any implicit acceptance of its legitimacy from a moral standpoint. But it remains too mired in conceiving of law’s
19 His influence is more dispositional than substantive. Austin’s desire to study the law descriptively, and the analytical rigor he aspired to, are more important than the conclusions he ultimately reached.
20 See H.L.A Hart. 7The Concept of Law: Second Edition. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1997). Not all recent commentators accept Hart’s criticisms of Austin. See Matthew Kramer. H.L.A Hart: Key Contemporary linkers. (Cambridge, UK: Polity Press, 2018).
21 Joseph Raz. 7The Authority of Law: Second Edition. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2009) and Scott Shapiro. Legality. (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2011).
                                      - 238 -
role in establishing and maintaining social order to take the key next step of reconstructing what the law can be in a society truly committed to respecting and amplifying human dignity. Without an account of what the law should be, it is worth asking what the cash benefit of legal positivism can be beyond serving as a kind of interesting intellectual achievement of interest purely to highly specialized legal philosophers.
Nowhere were these problems better expressed than in the work of the twentieth century’s greatest legal philosopher H.L.A Hart. Hart is interesting since he was committed both to arguing for a specific approach to liberal rights, in this case drawing on utilitarianism, while also wishing to dissociate the study of law and its functional role in maintaining order from an argument for its legitimacy. Indeed many of the case studies one encounters throughout Hart’s work-Nazi Germany, apartheid South Africa, and other wicked legal systems-he insists warrant neither sympathy or obedience. He displayed profound empathy with the subjects of injustice at the hands of the state; sentiments possibly enhanced by his own experiences as a gay man living at a time where that was criminal.22 None the less Hart’s positivism retains the liberal fixation on law and order, and his own conception of which rights would be morally appealing is fundamentally limited by an attachment to rule utilitarianism.
'tte details of Hart’s theory as presented in %e Concept of Law are sufficiently well known they will only require a brief elaboration here. Hart criticizes Austin’s earlier positivism for failing to take seriously the distinction between being obliged to submit to a law giving sovereign and being obligated to. As far as Austin is concerned, there is no meaningful difference between a criminal with sufficient power to issue commands and expect obedience and a genuine lawgiver. Austin’s sovereign is practically little different than a gunman or highwayman writ large. Hart thinks this is too crude a formulation. Instead he takes an idealized sociological stance to argue that legal regimes begin when a sufficiently large number of individuals in a given area holds a shared normative commitment to social rules they feel obligated to obey. In other words individuals feel
22 One can see a more direct engagement with LGTQ issues in Hart’s well known dispute with the conservative Patrick Devlin. See H.L.A Hart. Law, Liberty, and Morality. (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1963) and Patrick Devlin. “The Enforcement of Morals.” Maccabaean Lectures of Jurisprudence, March 1959.
                                      - 239 -those social rules are legitimate. Over time the inefficiencies of trying to enforce social rules ad hoc leads these individuals to recognize a sovereign law giver through a power-conferring rule of recognition. The most obvious is through a constitutional grant of legal authority as in the United States. Not everyone in the territorial jurisdiction of the new law giver needs to feel obligated to obey it, and indeed they may well be right to adopt such a stance. None the less if the sovereign law giver possesses sufficient capacity for violence then they become closer to the Austinian model in their capacity to oblige dissidents to obey through the threat of force. If there is a sufficiently stable situation the sovereign then establishes a legal system as a union of primary and secondary rules. Primary rules govern general societal conduct, and- initially at least-will likely conform to the comprehensive moral norms adopted by individuals as social rules in a pre-legal setting. Secondary rules concern changing the law, recognition of and enforcement of authority, and processes of adjudication.23 In his early paper “Positivism and the Separation of Law and Morals” Hart takes up some of the classical dilemmas concerning adjudication to acknowledge that there may be situations which emerge in the course of life which are either not governed by legal rules or there is an interpretive ambiguity. These pose problems of the “penumbra.”24 In such cases legal officials like judges must create new laws in order to fill in the gap through an ongoing interpretive process.25
Hart’s argument is exceptionally novel and appealing in many respects, particularly its approach to legal legitimacy. It is also difficult to understand precisely what kind of argument he is making, which has provoked an endless series of articles and books on whether there is an implicit
23 See H.L.A. Hart 7The Concept of Law: Second Edition. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1997).
24 H.L.A Hart. “Positivism and the Separation of Law and Morals.” Harvard Law Review, Vol 71, 1958 at pg 607.
25 Hart spends a great deal of time drawing on the resources of ordinary language philosophy when discussing these points. He generally believes that there is an “open texture” to language which means that, contra the desire of classical legal positivists and their descendants such as originalists, often times these gaps or ambiguities are inevitable results of semantic indeterminacy. There is therefore no alternative but to have Judges or other legal officials fill the gap by appealing to their own moral views. This is of course a troubling argument for many who insist on seeing law as a science of rule application. See Bill Bix. “H.L.A Hart and the Open Texture of Language.” Law and Philosophy, Vol 10, 1991.
                                      - 240 -
moral claim underlying his position.26 Hart himself seems committed to the idea that his idealized sociological distinction between those who feel obligated and those who feel obliged to obey the law captures the sense of legitimation adopted by the former group which takes an “internal point of view” toward obedience, without morally insisting on the legitimacy of law for those who adopt an “external point of view.” At the same time he does concede to critics like Lon Fuller that any legal system must accept a “minimal content of natural law” in order to function.27 My own position is that Fuller expresses a point which is deeper than Hart and other positivist legal theorists accept,28 which is that the so called “minimal content” or natural law in the positivist system reflects a deep moral commitment to the idea that law establishes and maintains order. Now Hart doesn’t go so far as to say that legal order would be preferable to any anarchic or rebellious system. Indeed his condemnations of both Nazi and apartheid law suggest he would accept situations where individuals would rise up to protest wicked legal regimes. But as far as Hart is concerned the law must uphold order or not be law.
This problem comes out when trying to understand the account of legitimacy underpinning Hart’s reasoning about those who adopt an “internal” perspective accepting social rules and a subsequent legal system baptized as such by the rule of recognition, and those who adopt an external perspective rejecting it but feeling obliged to obey. Hart’s contention is that in such circumstances efficacious law will continue to maintain order through a mixture of force and the certainty of legal subjects about what rules they must follow. But if that is true it is not truly clear in what respect Hart’s theory differs that dramatically from Austin’s. He simply moves the problem of law’s association with violence up a level to claims that those who adopt an internal perspective towards the law feel the sovereign is justified in using force to compel those who disagree to obey, and point to the rule of recognition as vindication. But the mere
26 The endless back and forth between Dworkinians and Hartians testifies to this. I will discuss this more in the next section.
27 Lon Fuller. The Morality of Law: Revised Edition. (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1969) and Lon Fuller. “Positivism and Fidelity to the Law: A Reply to Professor Hart.” Harvard Law Review, Vol 71, 1958.
28 Scott Shapiro. Legality. (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2011).
                                      - 241 -designation of a sovereign by a rule cannot cancel out the natural right to freedom Hart also insists we possess. This leads us to ask why anyone who adopts the external perspective should feel compelled to dignify rules backed by threats of force with the name “law” if it differs little from the compulsion of the gunman except that the Hartian sovereign is recognized as a lawgiver by some people. One of Hart’s answers is that the sovereign must also accept a so called minimal content of natural law into his positivist system where natural law rules are also order abetting. When one then looks at the various rules Hart claims constitute a minimal content of natural law-the protection of persons, property, and promises-each has a peculiarly conservative flavor in the sense of favoring liberal principles conducive to order while downplaying liberty. This exists in a strange tension with Hart’s claim that the only natural right is a right to basic freedom, which would seem to disrupt any contention that the minimal content of natural law would be purely order inducing. This is because, as Nozick claims, liberty inherently disrupts patterns of social ordering.29 If people truly do possess a natural right to be free which preexists a positivist legal system it is unclear why free individuals would or should agree to conform to the minimal content of natural law Hart accepts without ensuring the order established worked in their interests.
To conclude, the conceptual debates surrounding Hart’s theory of legitimacy, and whether it can be purely descriptive or must involve bringing in a robust normative outlook, seems to be irresolvable precisely because law blurs the distinction between facts and norms as Habermas would say.30 Raz appears more consistent in acknowledging that any such purely descriptive account must end with the conclusion that there is no obligation to obey the law for those who merely feel obliged to offer obedience. But I would go further and say this elides the distinction between the mere exercise of commands backed by violence and anything resembling a legal system, since the only meaningful difference is the latter is dignified through its baptism by the rule of recognition calling someone or something the sovereign. Hart ultimately seems to square this difference
29 Robert Nozick. Anarchy, State, and Utopia. (New York, NY: Basic Books, 1974).
30 Jurgen Habermas. Between Facts and Norms; Contributions to a Discourse Theory of Law and Democracy, trans. William Rehg. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998).
                                      - 242 -
by appealing to the idea of static order, or as he calls it efficacy, on the assumption that this is non moral ideal. Yet the very idea of order inducing natural law content undermines this conceit, since there appear to be some moral acts no effective legal system can commit while remaining as such. It seems impossible that Hart could make such a claim without reasoning about what moral acts individuals most prioritize, based on his independent judgements on what individuals want and need.
The solution to this problem, I propose, is to move away from the Archimedean ambition of trying to merely describe the law without evaluating, including judging it morally. Every act of theoretical or philosophical description is fundamentally a reconstructive cognitive act that owes much to the history and psychology of its proponents and their given communities; a point the legal realists from Oliver Wendell Holmes to Jerome Franke understood well and whose roots arguably go back to Hegel.31 Once we recognize a reconstruction involves both description and moral judgement we move from the complex but ultimately unproductive dispute about whether we are describing the law as it is or presenting it as it should be, to an equally complex but potentially more fruitful dispute about how it should be conceived for human betterment. In this case, by reconceiving the law along the lines necessary to amplify human dignity. Before discussing this, it is necessary to look at one final approach to the law pioneered by the liberal tradition to demonstrate its own virtues and fundamental deficiencies.
Law, Freedom and Equality in Ronald Dworkin and Richard Posner
Dworkin was the most effective of Hart’s many critics. Unlike either of them he responded to the limitations of positivism by developing a novel theory of law as integrity which could actually appeal to many
31 See Oliver Wendell Holmes. 7The Common Law. (United States: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2009) and Oliver Wendell Holmes. “The Path of the Law.” Harvard Law Review, 457, 1897 and Jerome Frank. Law and the Modern Mind. (Piscataway, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2009).
                                      - 243 -progressives while simultaneously satisfying the analytical urge for systematic rigor and consistency pioneered by Austin. Ultimately Dworkin’s theory falters precisely because of this need to impose not just any liberal order, but Dworkinian order across the entire citizenry and to do so via the fiat of empowered and super-Enlightened judges. His theory is overloaded in its ambition to view justice in all its facets-moral, political, legal-from a hedgehog’s perspective.32 None the less there is much that can be learned from its successes and failures if interpreted the right way.
Dworkin’s approach to the law is, appropriately enough, reconstructive. As early as Taking Rights Seriously he pushed against conceiving law on the lines of a model of rules, which is how he interpreted the more sophisticated brand of legal positivism put forward by Hart. Dworkin exploits the problem of the penumbra at the heart of Hart’s account of adjudication to argue that Judges do not simply create law by imposing their own moral preferences. For Dworkin, there is indeed “one right answer” to all legal problems though strangely he postulates that it would take a superhuman Judge Hercules to reach it every time.33 Much like we must believe in objectivity and truth.34 Interestingly for the early Dworkin the way to reach the right answer isn’t to simply look at the text of the law but to examine the principles underpinning it: particularly those embedded in foundational documents such as the American constitution. When rules can provide no determinative results in hard cases, Judges must look to these embedded principles-which for the early Dworkin are non-conflicting-to fill the gap. 'ttis also impacts their approach to the subject of interpreting precedents, as Dworkin makes clear in “Hard Cases.”
... Gravitational force is part of the practice Hercules' general theory of precedent must capture. In this important respect, judicial practice differs from the practice of officials in other institutions. In chess, officials conform to established rules in a way that assumes full institutional autonomy. They exercise originality only to the extent required by the fact that an occasional rule, like the rule about forfeiture, demands that originality.
32 Ronald Dworkin. Justice for Hedgehogs. (Cambridge, MA. Harvard University Press, 2010).
33 Ronald Dworkin. “Hard Cases.” Harvard Law Review 88 (1975) at pg 1081.
34 Ronald Dworkin. “Objectivity and Truth: You’d Better Believe It.” Philosophy and Public Affairs, Vol 25, 1996.
                                      - 244 -
Each decision of a chess referee, therefore, can be said to be directly required and justified by an established rule of chess, even though some of these decisions must be based on an interpretation, rather than on simply the plain and unavoidable meaning, of that rule. Some legal philosophers write about common law adjudication as if it were in this way like chess, except that legal rules are much more likely than chess rules to require interpretation. That is the spirit, for example, of Professor Hart's argument that hard cases arise only because legal rules have what he calls "open texture." In fact, judges often disagree not simply about how some rule or principle should be interpreted, but whether the rule or principle one judge cites should be acknowledged to be a rule or principle at all.35
The point is that where some rule or precedent contravenes basic rights, it must be acknowledged that it is no rule or precedent of sufficient gravity to warrant fidelity. Rights trump all else. The most important of these principles are, as the book’s title suggests, liberal rights. 'ttese operate as what Dworkin calls “trumps” which can be used to annul policy oriented rules which violate principled rights. In this manner Dworkin effectively resuscitates a deontological minded approach to jurisprudential interpretation which contrasts effectively with utilitarian inspired legal positivism. By the time of Law’s Empire almost a decade later, Dworkin elaborates on his position by describing law as fundamentally a moral enterprise committed to the ideal of integrity where rules flow from principles which are definitively interpreted in their best possible light. Of course theory of interpretation presented, drawing on figures like Hans Georg Gadamer, is complicated by the fact that no one author is responsible for presenting such a definitive interpretation.36 There are many legal officials operating at any time, and countless more in the distant past and in the future. Dworkin ingenuously invokes the metaphor of a chain novel to explain how interpretation committed to integrity can still be carried on over time by many different interpreters. He asks us to imagine a novel not being written by one, but several authors over an extended period of time. Each author is responsible for ensuring the novel is the best possible version of itself, which requires
35 Ronald Dworkin. “Hard Cases.” Harvard Law Review 88 (1975) at pg 1089.
36 Ronald Dworkin. Law's Empire. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1986).
                                      - 245 -them to interpret the previous story in its best light while ensuring consistency between what came before and their own contribution.37
What is impressive and worth preserving about this theory is both its principled commitment to rights, but equally the intersubjective and ultimately democratic form interpretation takes over time. No one person or Judge, even a hypothetical Hercules, is intended to have the last word on what the law should be. Instead it is a cooperative project which is carried out intersubjectively both within and beyond generations. While there are strong elitist connotations in the seemingly bottomless trust and sunny optimism Dworkin places in human all too human Judges to carry out such a project, elements of it can be harnessed for more progressive purposes. IAs it stood by the late 1980s Dworkin’s theory of judicial interpretation was a brilliant account of how adjudication could be carried out without conceding to the problem of the penumbra which legal realists embraced, critical legal thinker exploited to prove the conceit of law’s neutrality, and positivists like Hart either attempted to avoid or begrudgingly came to accept. It was also sufficiently detached from a comprehensive moral outlook that even normative positivists like Jeremy Waldron found interesting ways of bringing Dworkinian insights to bear.38 But this contribution was insufficient for Dworkin, who really should have quit while he was ahead. As described in Law’s Empire and Taking Rights Seriously Dworkin makes a very compelling case that Judges do not have to bring their specific moral views to bear in the law, since they can mine the rich vein of principles embedded in their respective legal traditions and documents. Yet nothing commits those convinced by Dworkin thus far to any substantive moral commitments about what the law should be outside those found in their own traditions; a point which could well have some very conservative connotations as commentators like Roger Scruton noted.39
But this turned out to be not enough for the overambitious liberal thinker. Starting particularly in 1997 with Freedoms Law: The Moral
37 Ronald Dworkin. Law's Empire. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1986) at pg 229.
38 See especially his paper Jeremy Waldron “Torture and Positive Law: Jurisprudence for the Whitehouse” Colombia Law Review, 105 (2005).
39 Roger Scruton. Fools, Frauds, and Firebrands: Thinkers of the New Left. (London: Bloomsbury Continuum, 2015) at pg 51.
                                      - 246 -
Reading of the American Constitution Dworkin abandoned to quasi-intersubjective approach to legal interpretation given in Law’s Empire for an increasingly myopic monologue. Not only should the law be interpreted in Dworkininan fashion but, what do you know, it turns out that the principles underpinning it must be as well. Superficially this is not necessarily true great a slight since many of us believe the law should be moral, and its morals should be ours. What is distinctive is Dworkin’s insistence that Judges should be responsible for implementing this vision, over and against the wishes of democratic societies if necessary, because of his faith that they will get it right. From a progressive standpoint this becomes doubly troublesome since there is much to admire in Dworkin’s account of morality and rights. As discussed in the earlier Chapter, it is committed to showing equal respect for individuals through establishing a relatively equality of resources for all. By the time of Justice for Hedgehogs Dworkin even connects this to a sustained argument on the importance of human dignity which has many impressive features.40 But this undemocratic faith in judges to establish the correct moral order is antithetical to any real respect for dignity, denying as it does the social freedom of subjects. It is also misguided. Dworkin’s view seems shaped by his experiences of the Warren Court, which famously reformed American law in a variety of progressive ways. But this is hardly the norm. Most frequently judges are the harbingers of reaction rather than change. Putting one’s faith in them so relentlessly, as Dworkin does, is a bargain fit for Midas. Instead of such a top down system of legality, individuals should be made freer to democratically determine which laws will govern in line with the first of the twinned rights.
Another figure who argued that Judges should impose his specific moral vision is Richard Posner. Posner is unique relative to Austin, Hart, and Dworkin in that he actually served as Judge in addition to writing as a legal scholar. He is also an eclectic thinker whose writings have ranged over an impressive variety of topics: from economic theory, to literature and psychology. However he remains best known for his 1980s book The Economics of Justice which lays out his argument that economic reasoning
40 Ronald Dworkin. Justice for Hedgehogs. (Cambridge, MA. Harvard University Press, 2010) at pgs
205-209.
                                      - 247 -can and should guide legal decision making. Interestingly, Posner criticizes the then dominant tendency to understand economics in utilitarian terms; in part because, as has been stressed through this book, there is a substantial disjunction between viewing individual actors as motivated by personal utility maximization and arguing for an impersonal application of the utilitarian reasoning in the aggregate. By contrast Posner argues that “wealth maximization” is more useful analytical tool for what Judges should aspire to achieve in cases involving individual actors. A Judge should try to find the most efficient legal route to ensuring the wealth of parties is maximized, which would be in the interest of all. Indeed Posner goes so far as to equate efficient wealth maximization with justice in the law generally. He also implies that the possibility of doing so is already implicit in the structure of American common law. As Posner puts it:
... Efficiency as I define the term is an adequate concept of justice that can be plausibly imputed to Judges, at least in common law adjudication. The reason for this conclusion, it turns out, also points the way toward a reconciliation of the efficiency theory of the common law with the interest group or redistributive theories that dominate current economic analyses of legislation.41
This reflects his libertarian-pragmatist approach to the law, which infamously insists we need pay less attention than is usually thought to the specificity of legal rules and focus instead on achieving the most wealth maximizing outcome on a case by case basis. While displaying impressive erudition and an admirable lack of dogmatism, I ultimately do not find Posner’s account of the law compelling. Part of this is due to my own reservations about the moral virtues of libertarianism, which I have already discussed at length in this book. But the more important reason for our purposes is how Posner follows Dworkin in placing tremendous power in the hands of Judges to implement his vision of the ideal moral order. But unlike at least the early Dworkin of Taking Rights Seriously Posner doesn’t even think that Judges need to be bound by principles
41 Richard Posner. The Economics of Justice: Second Edition. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1983) at pg 6.
                                      - 248 -
which are in fact embedded in their legal traditions, let alone surface legal rules. Like Oliver Wendell Holmes and Learned Hand, Posner sees nothing unusual about granting sufficiently educated and effective Judges effectively acting as wealth-maximizing legislators so long as they are sufficiently efficient. In other words if Judges create the order Posner wants to see they let them legislate away. What matters is that the outcome is amenable to wealth maximization. This remarkable elitism reflects many of the limitations to the libertarian approach to freedom I have highlighted. Its emphasis on liberty is entirely wrapped up in an economic commitment to capitalism, and is largely indifferent to the social freedom of citizens to actually determine the laws which will govern them. This contravenes the dignity of the subjects of law, who should be entitled to have a say in the forces which aspire to dominate them. The novelty of critical legal studies lay in its willingness to accept the indeterminacy of law as Holmes, Hand, and Posner do, without ceding tremendous authority to Judges to settle such issues in line with their own substantive moral outlooks. In this respect critical legal studies was far less elitist and authoritarian than its liberal counterparts.
The Critical Legal Rejoinder
Critical legal studies followed legal realism in recognizing that the liberal legalist attachment to upholding order-whether merely as a matter of description in the case of Austin and Hart or outright prospection in the case of Dworkin and Posner-owed much to an antiquated metaphysical view of the world. In particular it drew much direct and indirect inspiration from the early modern Galilean and later Newtonian vision of nature as governed by physical laws which operated in a deterministic and predictable manner which could be ascertained by human reason. Ironically this was conjoined to an account of the individual as a free actor which was in many respects incompatible with such a deterministic vision. It was little more than a century ago that legal philosophy began to undertake an evolutionary turn which drew on more novel and dynamic
                                      - 249 -scientific inspirations.42 This is significant since the mechanistic vision of the universe put forward by Galileo and Newton-remarkable as it was for its own time43-is not a useful analog for human societies. As has been noted by figures from Hegel through Marx and Unger, history is nothing if not the story of change. Efforts to inhibit it through the establishment of permanent and enduring orders-and associated naturalizing ideologies stressing their false necessity-are Sisyphean tasks which often preclude us from examining the tensions and injustices of the present which a society committed to human dignity would seek to overcome.
'tte job of a genuinely critical legal theory is therefore to reconstruct a vision of law as both maintaining efficacy while leaving greater ideological and material space for change. For many traditional legal theorists this will seem to be a contradiction in terms since law has the very conservative purpose of inhibiting exactly that. This represents a failure of the imagination comparable to those who were unable to extricate themselves from the Galilean and Newtonian paradigms of physics, though the contours are slightly different. Law is an eminently human creation. It is no more natural or eternal than industrial capitalism was transhis-torical, and the failure to recognize this is not merely descriptive but normative. By failing to recognize how society might be reconstructed along lines more amenable to the advancement of human dignity through applying a false necessity to the ordered concept of law, we permit the perpetuation of injustices which might be ameliorated through a more creative perspective. Critical legal theorists have always understood this, and reacted strongly against the circular logics by which elites tautologically justified their own immutable hold on what law is and should be.
Of course insisting we reconstruct the law to be more amenable to human dignity and actually carrying out this task are two different activities. In the following sections I will take a few steps in the direction of
42 See Allan Hutchinson. Evolution and the Common Law. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2005).
43 Since superseded by the more counter-intuitive ontologies of quantum theory. See Roberto Unger and Lee Smolin. 7The Singular Universe and the Reality of Time: A Proposal in Natural Philosophy. (Cambridge, UK Cambridge University Press, 2014) and my own reflections in Matthew McManus. “Science, Philosophy, and the Return of Time: Reflections on Speculative bought.” Cosmos and History, Vol 13 (3), December 2017.
                                      - 250 -
framing a new and more dynamic ontology for a reconstructed legal system. Much as Hobbes was inspired by the mechanistic metaphysics of his day I too will appeal to dynamic ontology for guidance on how this task might be carried out, drawing particular inspiration from figures like Henri Bergson, Gilles Deleuze, and of course Roberto Unger.
A Dynamic Ontological Reconstruction of Law Part I: Philosophical Foundations in Henri Bergson, Gilles Deleuze, and Roberto Unger
My actions, then, are distinct from my life as a whole. In fact in the modern period the concern with one’s life as a whole is diminished. Some philosophers have taken this languishing of concern with a whole life as a philosophical loss. The question How should one act? divorces one’s deeds from oneself in a way that is alienating. Our morality fails to be integrated into our lives; it exists out there, apart from the rest of our existence. If a person is forced to ask about how to act without at the same time seeing the answer to that question as being related to one’s particular life, then one’s relation to morality becomes fissured.
Todd May in Gilles Deleuze: An Introduction
The dynamic ontology I am describing has deep roots in a number of traditions, from Marxism to process theology to the new philosophy of physical time put forward by Roberto Unger and Lee Smolin in The Singular Universe and the Reality of Time. 'tte single most important figure was Henri Bergson, who put forward a remarkable theory of time which was then extended to a more general ontological outlook. Bergson criticized the Enlightenment conception of time, as found in the works of Kant for example, as being essentially analogous to space. In particular theorists of time treated it as a linear sequence of spatialized moments; one entered “this moment” and progressed to the next rather like one moved from a room into another. The Bergsonian insight was to observe that time was qualitatively different than space, in that time necessarily carries forward what existed in the past while space has extensional points which can be distinguished from one another. It would be nonsensical to
                                      - 251 -describe myself as existing in the same space when I move from one room to another. But it is not nonsensical to claim that my present, and the present of all existence, contains within it everything which happened earlier in time. Or that the future will as well. Indeed this is a necessary feature of existence which our tendency to fragment time through breaking it into spatialized moments misconstrues it in fundamental ways. Most importantly it effectively negates the real influence time has on our life by suggesting human action is merely the consequence of linear deterministic actions and not an act of creative novelty. In later books such as Creative Evolution he extended these claims to develop an orthogenetic account of the natural world which would influence later philosophers like Gilles Deleuze and Roberto Unger.
Deleuze makes the striking claim in Difference and Repetition that much of Western philosophy has entailed a forgetting of difference. What he means is that rather than accepting “difference in itself” philosophers have tried to subsume it within a deeper ontological totality-a shared identity. Hegel is a characteristic target here; rather than accepting the reality of difference it must be mediated dialectically to assume a form of dynamic unity with the absolute in thought. Spinoza is another, though treated more sympathetically by Deleuze. While the remarkable Jewish philosopher contributed incalculably to the history of philosophy with his notion of the “univocity of Being” which doesn’t subordinate the modes of divine existence to one another, he still suggests that ultimately everything becomes one in the substance of God.44 By contrast Deleuze insists that we take “difference in itself” seriously, recognizing how the repetition of individual entities within time enables them to combine into “multiplicities” while still remaining what they fundamentally are. Deleuze ingenuously connects this to Bergson’s philosophy of duration by arguing that earlier concepts of spatialized time also denied independence to difference by suggesting that all that is ultimately subsumed within deterministic processes which make reality what it is at any given moment.45 'ttis has ontological consequences in denying the virtual
44 Gilles Deleuze. Difference and Repetition, trans. Paul Patton. (New York, NY: Columbia University Press, 1994) at pgs 32-42.
45 Gilles Deleuze. Difference and Repetition, trans. Paul Patton. (New York, NY: Columbia University Press, 1994) at pgs 71-73.
                                      - 252 -
possibility of new multiplicities emerging which couldn’t have been predicated before within the linear progression of time. By contrast Deleuze insists that the possible has a reality above what exists right now, since it contains everything within itself that came before and the potential for radically new assemblages of multiplicities which could not have been predicted. A century later Roberto Unger and Lee Smolin would reach similar conclusions about the way physics treated time as the unfurling of necessary laws which determined everything which occurs in nature. By contrast they stress the “reality of time” and reach the radical conclusion that even natural laws emerge and change over time through an ongoing evolutionary process. Such a universe where time was freed from spatial-ized determinism is one where the new can possibly emerge since the natural order and its laws never calcify into permanent forces. As Unger put it early in The Singular Universe:
The phenomena change, and so, together with them, does the way in which they change: that is to say, their laws. That is the principle of the co-evolution of phenomena and laws: a third aspect of the explanatory approach that natural history habitually uses. In the history that the naturalist studies, change changes discontinuously and repeatedly. Once again the range of application of the principle of the co-evolution of phenomena and laws is not coterminous with the limits of the biosphere. It too extends backward to lifeless nature and thus has an open frontier of application to the history of the universe. The methods of change, which we express as explanatory laws, shift with the appearance of life. They change again with the emergence of multicellular organisms. And then again with sexual reproduction and the Mendelian mechanisms. They change with the emergence of consciousness and its equipment by language. These are not just changes in the kinds of beings—in this instance, living beings—that exist. They are also changes in the way in which phenomena change as well as in the distinctions between them, as the broader interpretation of the mutability of types suggests.46
By this point some may be wondering, this is all well and good but what does it have to do with liberalism or liberal legalism? The answer
46 Roberto Unger and Lee Smolin. The Singular Universe and the Reality of Time: A Proposal in Natural Philosophy. (Cambridge, UK Cambridge University Press, 2014) at pg 64.
                                      - 253 -relates to the models we use to characterize law. Unger, who got his start as a critical legal theorist, was well aware of how the Galilean and Newtonian philosophy of nature impacted liberal understandings of the law. On this natural paradigm existence was ultimately not the realm of change, but permanence, as set by enduring physical laws which generated the settled order of the universe. The deterministic power of this model was expressed in the various metaphorical descriptions of God as a watchmaker, who set up the natural laws of physics and then allowed time to tick on a mechanistically driven path.47 This finds its social expression in the work of figures from Hobbes through Austin and Dworkin, who insist that law must also establish a form of permanent order which follows certain positivist rules or shows fidelity to uncontroversial moral principles. Where these figures do give space for law to evolve and change, it must follow as deterministic a path as possible through being driven by judge made adjudication. In other words it must be an elite driven enterprise which commits the law to evolve-if it must- in ways which are driven not by genuine multiplicities containing the many different individuals and groups governed by the legal system. The differences of society are to be subsumed under the orders identified and implemented by those who purport to know better.
This is a fundamentally undemocratic and undignified way to approach to concept of law, and we can surely do better in the twenty-first century. While Deleuze’s ruminations with Guattari about shizoanalyzis and escaping societies of control are interesting, they are also frustratingly opaque and presented with a love of needless pretension.48 In the section that follows I will sketch out a model of law which draws inspiration from these dynamic natural philosophies, but attempt to do so in a more accessible manner oriented by a commitment to individual and social dignified self-authorship. Its evolution will be driven in a jurisgenerative manner from the bottom up rather than the top down.
47 This presented substantial problems for philosophers and theologians attempting to reconcile Newtonianism with some account of free will, with Kant being the most famous.
48 Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari. Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia, trans. Robert Huerley, Mark Seem, Helen B. Lane. (New York, NY: Penguin Books, 1977) and Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari. A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia, trans. Brian Massumi. (Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1987).
                                      - 254 -
A Dynamic Ontological Reconstruction of Law Part II: Rethinking Legal Realist and Critical Legal Approaches to Law
The key insight of the legal realist movement was to take seriously the evolutionary notion that law changes with time. This was well captured as early as Oliver Wendell Holmes under the influence of American pragmatism. In the opening of his book The Common Law Holmes repudiates the static quality of axiomatic, positivistic interpretations of legality and calls for a more temporally minded approach to law which appreciates the holism of what was, is, and could be.
The life of the law has not been logic: it has been experience. The felt necessities of the time, the prevalent moral and political theories, intuitions of public policy, avowed or unconscious, even the prejudices which judges share with their fellow-men, have had a good deal more to do than the syllogism in determining the rules by which men should be governed. The law embodies the story of a nation’s development through many centuries, and it cannot be dealt with as if it contained only the axioms and corollaries of a book of mathematics. In order to know what it is, we must know what it has been, and what it tends to become. We must alternately consult history and existing theories of legislation. But the most difficult labor will be to understand the combination of the two into new products at every stage. The substance of the law at any given time pretty nearly corresponds, so far as it goes, with what is then understood to be convenient; but its form and machinery, and the degree to which it is able to work out desired results, depend very much upon its past.49
The emphasis on experience here is telling; legal realism followed philosophical pragmatism in insisting that the Newtonian and Galilean model of law is inadequate, since it attempted to provide a syllogistic approach applying rules to a social world which was constantly changing. Rather than engage such a Sisyphean task the legal realists insist Judges must be attentive to the needs of their society to ty and bring about more
49 Oliver Wendell Holmes. The Common Law. (United States: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2009) at pg 1.
                                      - 255 -“desired results.” Connected to this were profound shifts away from positivist theories of how language operated. Early linguistic theories centered on the ideal of language as means of describing the world as accurately as possible; an effort that climaxed with the early Wittgenstein’s well known “picture theory” of language and other variants of logical positivism. Unfortunately the deeper one probed into these matters the clearer it became that language did not and likely could not simply describe the world as it is. Language functioned less like a picture and more like various games which emerged from distinctive “forms of life” as the later Wittgenstein put it.50 'ttis meant that there could be no determinative answers to what words referred to in their descriptions of the world, let alone a clear answer to what was meant by moral terms such as “equality” or “freedom.” The consequence of this for the law was that where the text of the law was indeterminate, Judges would have to fill in the blanks. For someone like Hart, this would only be required in “pen-umbral” contexts since often enough the resources of ordinary language philosophy could provide a clear enough answer about what legal rules specified and what they applied to. Those who adopted more indeterminate approaches to language still, particularly those pioneered in various post-modern theories, naturally were even more skeptical than figures like Hart. Consequently the ontology law “is” would never remain static. It would necessarily evolve over time shaped by the interpretations, experiences, hopes, prejudices, and languages of society.
Unfortunately, as has already been stressed elsewhere, the answer to this problems given Holmes and others was to put considerable or even endless faith in Judges to determine the best possible outcome given legal indeterminacy. As Buck v Bell demonstrated, Holmes might have shown greater wisdom had he demonstrated greater humility. It is not at all obvious why Judges should have free reign to remake the law as they see fit to produce better results as they perceive them. Indeed one might follow a cannier legal realist, Jerome Frank, in pointing out that Judges are as bound up with psychological and disciplinary limitations as anyone
50 Ludwig Wittgenstein. Philosophical Investigations, trans. G.E.M Anscombe, P.M.S. Hacker, Joachim Schulte. (Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing, 2001).
                                      - 256 -
else.51 In other words, it is an ideologically determined pathology which fills in the blanks when legal indeterminacy rears its abyssal head. Critical legal theory built on this insight with its innumerable studies about the limitations of judicial thinking, dominated as it tends to be by the experiences of elites who come from a very particular strata of society and who have always been prone to naturalizing their own privileges and ways of thinking about the world. 'ttis way of thinking about the world is all too often consonant with the limitations of liberalism discussed above. Given the option of a dynamic approach to legality governed by the fiat of Judges, and a positivistic approach which stresses the strict application of legal rules, one should not be surprised many opt for the latter option. Indeed so repellent is the idea that many are willing to ignore the semantic problems with positivistic theories of language to insist that if there is no determinative answer to legal questions, and Judges are therefore required to rule by fiat, the entire legitimacy of law would be undermined.
However critical legal theory has always struggled to provide an answer to what should replace Judge or elite made law. They rightly accuse it of ideologically replicating the limitations of liberal society under the auspices of conforming to legal formalism and merely applying the ultimately indeterminate rules of society. But the by now tired conviction that trashing is the only duty of a critical legal theory has limited its imagination in theorizing alternatives. 'ttis has extended, bafflingly, to an unwillingness to marry the critique of liberal law and legal formalism to a normative outlook which might supersede the limitations of liberalism. The solution has always been to turn to rights discourse; but by delinking rights from the rigid role they are meant to play in liberalism to insulate against efforts to democratize society or redistribute property. It also means understanding rights not as formalistic principles ala Dworkin, where their meaning is settled through incorporation into a judicially driven interpretive project with one run right answer, but as jurisgenera-tive. Rights operate on a continuum of specificity, with human dignity and the twinned rights operating as broad principles intended to birth “daughter rights” through their democratic interpretation by citizens and the subjects of law in society.
51 Jerome Frank. Law and the Modern Mind. (Piscataway, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2009).
                                      - 257 -A Dynamic Ontological Reconstruction of Law Part III: Framing Rights as Jurisgenerative Powers to Achieve Dignified Self-Authorship Through the Law
Rights have their basis in the moral requirement that individuals should be entitled to lead lives of dignified self-authorship. The most important rights required to lead such dignified lives are to individual and democratic self-authorship and to an equality of expressive capabilities, subject to the limitations described in the earlier Chapter. But the twinned rights operate at a sufficiently high level of generality that tremendous space is left for the citizens and individuals governed by law to interpret them in a vast number of different ways. 'tte twinned rights are therefore not trumps intended to inhibit policy, but jurisgenerative in the sense that they will be politically and discursively invoked to justify and demand a broader array of positive rights and legal reforms through deliberative democratic processes. Most particularly this will include the precise ways an equality of expressive capabilities is to be achieved given the socio-historical contexts and interests of individuals in a society.
Conceiving of rights on jurisgenerative lines naturally deviates substantially from the deontological norm where they are intended as settled protections or trumps against state interference. While the critical legal model of rights does entail such protections it posits that the deontologi-cal approach is too formalistic and still conceives of rights as either static moral principles or creatures of positive law which are to be settled upon once and for all by theorists or legal officials. Instead the power to define what is connoted by rights should be devolved to a greater extent to the citizens and subjects of law. Democratic authors would configure together in new multiplicities to deliberate upon and agitate on how to redefine the contexts in which they exist to expand their overall capacity for individual and social authorship. At times these multiplicities would serve as enduring features of the society continually checking power and privilege; much as the labor movement and unionization once did. Early labor activists refused to accept the classical liberal interpretation of rights, with its strict commitment to property and qualified democracy, but instead
2?                                      - 8 -
deployed rights to expression to demand further rights to participation in the makeup of the workplace and greater economic benefits. At other points the multiplicities which converged would serve the transient function of overcoming a specific form of discrimination before evolving in new directions once their task is complete. Many of the anti-colonial movements in developing countries carried out this difficult transition, as they shifted from overcoming the legacies of direct colonialism and instead turned their attention to post-colonial efforts to establish more equitable power relations between emerging states and their former selfappointed masters. Finally some multiplicities would be focused non on engendering new positive rights, but ensuring the proper protection of those which are already established. The Civil Rights movement in the United States is a paradigmatic example of just such a democratic multiplicity, with Martin Luther King Jr. insisting that the country extend the liberal rights present in the American constitution to African Americans and take steps to ensure they are respected even by racists and bigots. As he put is in his remarkable “To the Mountaintop” speech, the intention of Luther’s civil rights movement was to ensure the country was “true to what it said on paper.”52
This brings us to the key differences between a critical legal approach to law and jurisgenerative rights, and its liberal counterpart. At times liberal law has facilitated the emergence of these multiplicities through its protection of rights to expression and assembly. But as has been discussed at length through this book all too often it has resisted them under the auspices of maintaining order; and in its neoliberal guise to ensure the world is safe for property and the smooth movement of capital. This was not the first such failure. When it came to unionization, anti-colonialism, and the Civil Rights movement the state initially pushed hard against participation and reform. A critical legal model of rights based on human dignity would not entail the sane skepticism, but instead facilitate the emergence of these democratic multiplicities and put their interest’s front and center.
52 Dr. Martin Luther King. “I’ve Been To the Mountaintop: Address Delivered at Bishop Charles Mason Temple.” The Martin Luther King Jr Research and Education Center, April 1968 https:// kinginstitute.stanford.edu/king-papers/documents/ive-been-mountaintop-address-delivered-bishop-charles-mason-temple.
                                      - 259 -The form law would take under these conditions would be far more dynamic than what is traditionally seen in liberal societies. It would resemble the evolutionary approach put forward by legal realists, but in this case driven by democratic multiplicities from the bottom up rather than elites from the top down. These multiplicities would still be limited in what they could do by the need to respect the twinned rights of all citizens, which could not be superseded even by majoritarianism. But the indeterminacy of language leaves sufficient space for new democratic multiplicities to form and interpret the twinned rights in novel ways which will birth more specific rights and legislation over time.
Conclusion: A Society of Dynamic Change
But the vision of empowerment in the classical doctrines of emancipation is clouded by unjustifiably restrictive assumptions about the possible forms of social life and in particular about the possible institutional definitions of markets and democracies. Such a program would characterize its proposals as outcomes of a specifiable series of conceptual and practical adjustments of existing arrangements and ruling ideas. It would deepen the conception of freedom as empowerment by proposing ways in- which this freedom may be more fully realized. It would cast its lot decisively with modernism, refusing to seek in anti-modernist fantasies a secret consolation for the failure to rethink and reconstruct the circumstances of life in the modern world. It would be a super-liberalism rather than either an antiliberalism or a synthesis of liberalism with its imaginary opposite.53
The kind of post-liberal society sketched out in this concluding two Chapters is not intended as a wholesale repudiation of liberalism. Instead it is much more in line with Unger’s description of the critical legal project as aiming for a kind of super-liberalism which fulfills its emancipatory and egalitarian promise of a society where the dignity of all is respected and amplified. It acknowledges the tremendous debt the modern world owes to the genius of the liberal tradition, while accepting that it is very far from perfect and is in need of rejuvenation. The rise of post-modern
53 Roberto Unger. Knowledge and Politics. (New York, NY: The Free Press, 1973) at pgs 339—340.
                                      - 260 -
conservative reactionary politics in the past decade testifies to the sense of anomie and dissatisfaction with the status quo felt by many in liberal states, and much of the blame for this has to be laid at the feet of the radicalized classical liberal program advanced by neoliberalism at the end of the twentieth century. Fortunately more egalitarian movements and programs have also been gaining ground: from the liberal socialism embodied in figures and parties like Alexandria Ocasio Cortez and Podemos, and the cosmopolitan egalitarian projects of Thomas Piketty, Michael Brooks and others. If they wish to avoid the failures of earlier egalitarian movements they would be wise to recognize the achievements of liberalism and invoke the appeal of rights and dignity already present within those societies, rather than relying on agonistic political theories and activism which simply wishes to trash everything which has come before. As Bergson, Deleuze and Unger have taught us the reality of time means that while the future is always open it will contain the past within it. Overcoming false necessity though self-authorship means rejecting the calcified image of a given order as natural and inevitable, subject to laws which must be imposed according to strict logics known only to elites. It does not mean treating history as the waste bin of failed projects on the way to a future utopia.
Human dignity is the correct ideal to strive for in the current cultural moment. It flows from the liberal insight that all are moral equals, and insists that a society which recognizes this must try to ensure its citizens and subjects are equal in fact rather than just in the formal auspices of the law. Unlike the Marxist and other traditions critical of liberalism, ensuring equality in fact does not require a rejection of rights but their expansion. The most important would be the twinned rights to self and democratic authorship and an equality of expressive capabilities. These rights would satiate the yearning of modern societies for more control over their lives and politics: the lack of which has been a major contributor to the appeal of post-modern conservative “populists” who promise to speak for the authentic people against their elitist enemies. The understandable appeal of these movements is undercut by their conviction that the solution to such problems lies not in treating all with more dignity, but denying it to others-migrants, feminists, minorities-who are cast as responsible for the crises washing over our world. Liberals have been right
                                      - 261 -to argue that we should deny such prejudices by calling them what they are-bigotry and regression-but have been unwilling to sufficiently examine how the limitations of their own doctrine might have contributed to their emergence. Many have expressly called for a tightening of elite power as a consequence, as though the proper response to post-modern conservative populism is to provide further ammunition to reactionary narratives. Progressives must do better than this by trying to form new democratic multiplicities committed to the establishment of a society firmly committed to human dignity.
Bibliography
Adorno, Theodor. The Culture Industry: Selected Essays on Mass Culture. (London, UK: Routledge, 1991).
Adorno, Theodor and Horkheimer, Max. Dialectic ofEnlightenment: Philosophical Fragments, trans. Edund Jephcott. (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2002).
Agamben, Giorgio. Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life, trans. Daniel Heller-Roazen. (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1998).
Agamben, Giorgio. State of Exception, trans. Kevin Attell. (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2005).
Althusser, Louis. For Marx. (London, UK: Verso Books, 2006).
Althusser, Louis. On Ideology. (London, UK: Verso Books, 2008).
Althusser, Louis. Reading Capital. (London, UK: Verso Books, 1997).
Anderson, Benedict. Imagined Communities, 2nd ed. (London, UK: Verso, 1991).
Anderson, Elizabeth. “What is the Point of Equality?” Ethics 109 (1999).
Anghie, Antony. “Francisco de Vittoria and the Colonial Origins of International Law” Social Legal Studies 5 (1996).
Arendt, Hannah. Between Past and Future. (London, UK: Penguin Books, 1961).
Arendt, Hannah. The Human Condition. (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1998).
Arendt, Hannah. The Origins ofTotalitarianism. (New York, NY: Harcout, 1955).
© The Author(s) 2020	2	63
M. McManus, A Critical Legal Examination of Liberalism and Liberal Rights, Palgrave Studies in Classical Liberalism, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61025-8
264 Bibliography
Arendt, Hannah. On Violence. (San Diego, CA: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2001).
Arguello, Sergio Martin Tapia. “The Modern Possibilities of Human Rights: A Critique of the Negative Critique of Law and Rights.” Mexican Law Review, Vol 10, 2018.
Aristotle. The Basic Works of Aristotle. (New York, NY: The Modern Library, 2001).
Austin, John. The Province of Jurisprudence Determined (and The Uses of the Study of Jurisprudence). (Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing, 1998).
Backhouse, Constance. Colour-Coded: A Legal History of Racism in Canada. (Toronto, ON: University of Toronto Press, 1999).
Barak, Aharon. Human Dignity: The Constitutional Value and the Constitutional Right. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2015).
Barclay, Linda. “The Importance of Equal Respect: What the Capabilities Approach Can and Should Learn from Human Rights Law.” In Political Studies, (2014).
Barclay, Linda. “What Kind of Liberal is Martha Nussbaum?” SATS: The Northern European Journal of Philosophy 4, (2003).
Barry, Brian. Culture and Equality: An Egalitarian Critique of Multiculturalism. (Boston, MA: Polity, 2000).
Bayefsky, Rachel. “Dignity, Honor, and Human Rights: Kant’s Perspective.” Political Theory, 41, (2013).
Baxi, Upendra. Human Rights in a Posthuman World: Critical Essays. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2007).
Beauvoir, Simone de. The Second Sex: Complete Edition, trans. Constance Borde. (New York, NY: Vintage Books, 2011).
Beitz, Charles R. “Human Rights and the Law of Peoples” in D.K. Chatterjee. The Ethics of Assistance: Morality and the Distant Needy (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2004).
Benhabib, Seyla. Democracy and Difference: Contesting the Boundaries of the Political. (Princeton, NJ. Princeton University Press, 1996).
Benhabib, Seyla. Dignity in Adversity: Human Rights in Troubled Times. (Boston, MA: Polity, 2011).
Benhabib, Seyla. The Rights of Other: Aliens, Residents, and Citizens. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2004).
Bentham, Jeremy. Selected Writings on Utilitarianism (Hertfordshire, UK: Wordsworth Editions, 2000).
Bergson, Henri. Creative Evolution. (Mineola, NY: Dover Publications,1998).
Bibliography 265
Bergson, Henri. An Introduction to Metaphysics. (Indianapolis, IN: Borris-Merril, 1955).
Bergson, Henri. Matter and Memory, trans. N.M Paul and W.S Palmer. (Brooklyn, NY: Zone Books, 2016).
Bergson, Henri. Time and Free Will: An Essay on the Immediate Data of Consciousness, trans. F.L Pogson. (Mineola, NY: Dover Publications, 2001).
Berlin, Isaiah. 7Zfe Crooked Timber of Humanity: Chapters in the History of Ideas, ed. Henry Hardy. (New York, NY: Knopf, 1991).
Berlin, Isaiah. Four Essays on Liberty. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1969).
Berlin, Isaiah. 7Zfe Proper Study of Mankind: An Anthology of Essays, ed. Henry Hardy and Roger Hausheer. (New York, NY: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1997).
Bix, Bill. “H.L.A Hart and the Open Texture of Language.” Law and Philosophy, Vol 10, 1991.
Blackstone, William. Commentaries on the Laws ofEngland in Four Books. Online Library of Liberty, April 13th 2016. https://oll.libertyfund.org/pages/ blackstone-on-the-absolute-rights-of-individuals-1753.
Bolton, John. “Is There Really “Law” in International Affairs?” Transnational and Contemporary Problems, 1 (2000).
Bolton, John. “John Bolton on Law, International Law, and American Sovereignty.” American Enterprise Institute. January 11, 2011. http://www. aei.org/publication/john-bolton-on-law-international-law-and-american-sovereignty/.
Bork, Robert. Coercing Virtue: %e Worldwide Rule of Judges. (Toronto, ON: Vintage Canada, 2002).
Bork, Robert. “The End of Democracy? Our Judicial Oligarchy.” In First 7Zfings, November 1996.
Boyle, James. “Thomas Hobbes and the Invented Tradition of Positivism: Reflections on Language, Power and Essentialism.” University of Pennsylvania Law Review, Volume 135, No 2, 1987.
Brandom, Robert. A Spirt of Trust: A Reading of Hegel’s Phenomenology of Spirit. (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2019).
Brennan, Jason. Against Democracy. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2016).
Brennan, Jason. Libertarianism: What Everyone Needs to Know. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2012).
Brown, Wendy. In the Ruins of Neoliberalism: Kie Rise of Antidemocratic Politics in the West. (New York, NY: Columbia University Press, 2019).
266 Bibliography
Brown, Wendy. States of Injury: Power and Freedom in Late Modernity. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995).
Brown, Wendy. Undoing the Demos: Neoliberalisms Stealth Revolution. (Brooklyn, NY: Zone Books, 2015).
Brown, Wendy. Walled States, Waning Sovereignty. (Brooklyn, NY: Zone Books, 2010).
Burke, Edmund. Reflections on the Revolution in France. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2009).
Burke, Edmund. A Philosophical Enquiry in the Sublime and Beautiful. (London, UK: Penguin Books, 1998).
Butler, Judith. Bodies That Matter: On the Discursive Limits of Sex (New York, NY: Routledge, 1993).
Butler, Judith. Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity (New York, NY: Routledge, 1990).
O’Callaghan, Connor. “Concerning a Critical Legal Pedagogy: Exposing Race linking In Political Canon.” Critical Legal linking December 7th 2015. “Concerning a Critical Legal Pedagogy.” http://criticallegalthinking. com/2015/12/07/concerning-a-critical-legal-pedagogy-exposing-race-thinking-in-political-canon/.
Capps, Patrick. Human Dignity and the Foundations of International Law. (London, UK. Bloomsbury Publishing, 2009).
Chalmers, David. 7The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Kieory. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1997).
Chomsky, Noam. On Language: Chomsky’s Classic Works Language and Responsibility and Reflections on Language in One Volume. (New York, NY: New Press, 1998).
Chung-Shu, Lo. “A Confucian Approach to Human Rights.” UNESCO Courier, April 2018 https://en.unesco.org/courier/2018-4/confucian-approach-human-rights.
Coombe, Rosemary and Weiss, Lindsay. “Neoliberalism, Heritage Regimes, and Cultural Rights: Politics in Assemblage.” In Lynn Meskell. Global Heritage: A Reader. (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell, 2015).
Cornell, Drucilla. At the Heart of Freedom: Feminism, Sex, and Equality. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1998).
Cover, Robert. “Nomos and Narrative.” Harvard Law Review 97 (1982).
Crenshaw, Kimberle. “Demarginalizing the Intersection of Race and Sex: A Black Feminist Critique of Antidiscrimination Doctrine, Feminist Theory and Antiracist Politics.” 7The University of Chicago Legal Forum, 1989.
Bibliography 267
Dahl, Robert A. Democracy and Its Critics. (New Haven, CN: Yale University Press, 1991).
Daniels, Norman. “Equality of What?: Welfare, Resources, or Capabilities?” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, Vol I, 1990.
Darian-Smith, Eve. Laws and Societies in Global Contexts: Contemporary Approaches. (Cambridge, UK. Cambridge University Press, 2013).
Deleuze, Gilles and Guattari, Felix. Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia, trans. Robert Huerley, Mark Seem, Helen B. Lane. (New York, NY: Penguin Books, 1977).
Deleuze, Gilles. Difference and Repetition, trans. Paul Patton. (New York, NY: Columbia University Press, 1994).
Deleuze, Gilles. Nietzsche and Philosophy, trans. Hugh Tomlinson. (New York, NY: Columbia University Press, 1983).
Deleuze, Gilles. Spinoza: Practical Philosophy, trans. Robert Hurley (San Francisco, CA: City Lights Books, 1988).
Deleuze, Gilles and Guattari, Felix. What Is Philosophy? trans. Hugh Tomlinson and Graham Burchell. (New York, NY: Columbia University Press, 1996).
Deleuze, Gilles and Guattari, Felix. A %ousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia, trans. Brian Massumi. (Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1987).
Deneen, Patrick. “After Liberalism: Can We Imagine a Humane, Post-Liberal Future?” Religion and Ethics, December 2014, http://www.abc.net.au/reli-gion/articles/2014/12/11/4146762.htm.
Deneen, Patrick. Conserving America: Essays on Present Discontents. (South Bend, IN: St Augustine Press, 2016).
Deneen, Patrick. “Unsustainable Liberalism.” First %ings, August 2012.
Deneen, Patrick. Why Liberalism Failed. (New Haven, CN: Yale University Press, 2018).
Derrida, Jacques. On Cosmopolitanism and Forgiveness. (London, UK: Routledge, 2001).
Derrida, Jacques. %e Gift of Death and Literature in Secret, trans. David Wills. (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2008).
Derrida, Jacques. Of Grammatology, trans. Gayatri Spivak. (Baltimore, MR: John Hopkins University Press, 1976).
Derrida, Jacques. Learning to Live Finally: %e Last Interview, trans. Pascale-Anne Brault and Michael Naas. (Brooklyn, NY: Melville House Publishing, 2007).
268 Bibliography
De Tocqueville, Alexis. Democracy in America and Two Essays on America. (London, UK: Penguin Classics, 2003).
Devlin, Patrick. “The Enforcement of Morals.” Maccabaean Lectures of Jurisprudence, March 1959.
Donnelly, Jack. Universal Human Rights in Theory and Practice: Third Edition. (Ithaca, NY. Cornell University Press, 2013).
Douzinas, Costas. The End of Human Rights: Critical Thought at the Turn of the Century. (Portland, OR: Hart Publishing, 2000).
Douzinas, Costas. “What Are Human Rights?” The Guardian, 18 March 2009.
Duchesne, Ricardo. Canada in Decay: Mass Immigration, Diversity, and the Ethnocide of Euro-Canadians. (London, UK: Black House Publishing Ltd, 2017).
Dworkin, Ronald. “The Decision that Threatens Democracy.” The New York Review of Books, May 13, 2010a.
Dworkin, Ronald. Freedom’s Law: The Moral Reading of the American Constitution (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1997)
Dworkin, Ronald. “Hard Cases.” Harvard Law Review 88 (1975).
Dworkin, Ronald. “Hart’s Postscript and the Character of Political Philosophy.” Oxford Journal of Legal Studies, Volume 24, No 1, 2004a.
Dworkin, Ronald. Justice for Hedgehogs. (Cambridge, MA. Harvard University Press, 2010b).
Dworkin, Ronald. Law’s Empire. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1986).
Dworkin, Ronald. A Matter of Principle. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1985).
Dworkin, Ronald. “Objectivity and Truth: You’d Better Believe It.” Philosophy and Public Affairs, Vol 25, 1996.
Dworkin, Ronald. “Rawls and the Law.” Fordham Law Review, Volume 72, 2004b.
Dworkin, Ronald. Sovereign Virtue: The Theory and Practice of Equality. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002).
Dworkin, Ronald. Taking Rights Seriously. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1977).
Dyzenhaus, David. “Hobbes and the Legitimacy of Law.” Law and Philosophy 20 (2001).
Dyzenhaus, David. “Liberalism After the Fall: Schmitt, Rawls, and the Problem of Justification” Philosophy and Social Criticism, Vol 22, 1996.
Bibliography 269
Eagleton, Terry. The Illusions of Postmodernism. (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell, 1996).
Eatwell, Roger and Goodwin, Matthew. National Populism: The Revolt Against Liberal Democracy. (London, UK: Pelican Books, 2018).
Edmundson, William. John Rawls: Reticent Socialist. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2017).
Ely, John. Democracy and Distrust: A Theory ofJudicial Review. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1981).
Ewald, William. “Unger’s Philosophy: A Critical Legal Study.” The Yale Law Journal, 97, (1988).
Ewick, Patricia and Silbey, Susan. The Common Place of Law: Stories From Everyday Life. (Chicago, IL. University of Chicago Press, 1998).
Ewick, Patricia and Silbey, Susan. “Conformity, Contestation, and Resistance: An Account of Legal Consciousness.” New England Law Review, 26, (1992).
Eze, Emmanuel “The Color of Race: The Idea of Race in Kant’s Anthropology” in Postcolonial African Philosophy: A Critical Reader, ed. Emmanuel Eze. (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 1997).
Fawcett, Edmund. Liberalism: The Life of An Idea: Second Edition. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2018).
Finnis, John. “The Critical Legal Studies Movement.” The American Journal of Jurisprudence, (30), 1985.
Finnis, John. “Law, Morality, and Sexual Orientation.” In John Corvino. Same Sex: Debating the Ethics, Science, and Culture of Homosexuality. (Lanham, NY, Rowman and Littlefield 1997).
Finnis, John. Natural Law and Natural Rights: Second Edition. (Oxford, UK. Oxford University Press, 2011).
Foucault, Michel. The Archaeology of Knowledgee, trans. A.M Sheridan Smith (London and New York, NY: Routledge, 2007).
Foucault, Michel. The Birth of Biopolitics: Lectures at the College De France 1978—1979, trans. Graham Burchell. (New York, NY: Picador, 2008).
Foucault, Michel. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, trans. Alan Sheridan (New York, NY: Vintage Books, 1975).
Foucault, Michel. The Foucault Reader, ed. Paul Rabinow. (New York, NY: Pantheon Books, 1984).
Foucault, Michel. The History of Sexuality Volume One: An Introduction, trans. Robert Hurley. (New York, NY: Vintage Books, 1980).
Foucault, Michel. Madness and Civilization: A History of Insanity in the Age of Reason, trans. Richard Howard. (New York, NY: Vintage Books, 1988).
270 Bibliography
Foucault, Michel. 7/fe Order offings. An Archaeology of the Human Sciences. (London, UK: Routledge Press, 2002).
Frank, Jerome. Law and the Modern Mind. (Piscataway, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2009).
Frankfurt, Harry G. On Inequality. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2015).
Friedman, Milton. Capitalism and Agency: Fortieth Anniversary Edition. (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2002).
Friedman, Milton and Friedman, Rose. Free To Choose: A Personal Statement. (Orlando, FL: Harcourt, Inc. 1980).
Fromm, Erich. Escape from Freedom. (New York, NY: Henry Holt and Company, 1994).
Fuller, Lon. %e Morality of Law: Revised Edition. (New Haven, CN: Yale University Press, 1969).
Fuller, Lon. “Positivism and Fidelity to the Law: A Reply to Professor Hart.” Harvard Law Review, Vol 71, 1958.
Gabel, Peter. “Critical Legal Studies as Spiritual Practice.” Pepperdine Law Review, Vol 36, (2012).
Genn, Hazel, Paths to Justice: What People Do and %ink about Going to Law, (Oxford, UK: Hart Publishing, 1999).
Giri, Ananta. “Rethinking Human Well-being: A Dialogue with Amartya Sen.” Journal of International Development, 12, (2000).
Goldmann, Lucien. Immanuel Kant. (London, UK: Verso Books, 2011).
Graham, Paul. Rawls: A Beginniner’s Guide. (Oxford, UK: Oneworld Publishers, 2007).
Gray, John. Hayek on Liberty: KiirdEdition. (London, UK: Routledge, 1998).
Green, Leslie. “Legal Positivism” Stanford Encyclopaedia of Philosophy, Stanford University, http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/legal-positivism/, 2003.
Grotius, Hugo. On the Laws of War and Peace, trans. A.C Campbell. (Kitchener, ON: Batoche Books, 2001).
Guinier, Lani. 7The Tyranny of the Majority: Fundamental Fairness in Representative Democracy. (New York, NY: Free Press, 1995).
Guttmann, Amy. “The Challenge of Multiculturalism in Political Ethics,” Philosophy and Public Affairs 22 (1993).
Guttmann, Amy and Thompson, Dennis. “Deliberative Democracy Beyond Process” 7/e Journal of Political Philosophy 10 (2002).
Bibliography 271
Gutmann, Amy and Tompson, Dennis. Democracy and Disagreement: Why Moral Conflict Cannot be Avoided in Politics, and What Should Be Done About It. (Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1996).
Habermas, Jurgen. Between Facts and Norms; Contributions to a Discourse Kieory of Law and Democracy, trans. William Rehg. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998a).
Habermas, J?rgen. 7The Crisis of the European Union: A Response, trans. Ciaran Cronin (Cambridge, MA: Polity, 2012).
Habermas, J?rgen. K>e Divided West, trans. (London, UK. Polity Press, 2006).
Habermas, J?rgen. “Human Dignity and the Realistic Utopia of Human Rights.” Metaphilosophy, Vol 41, 2010.
Habermas, J?rgen. “Modernity vs Postmodernity.” New German Critique, Vol 22, 1981.
Habermas, J?rgen. 7The Philosophical Discourse of Modernity: Twelve Lectures, trans. Frederick G. Lawrence. (Boston, MA: MIT Press, 1998b).
Habermas, J?rgen. 7The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An Inquiry into a Category of Bourgeois Society, trans. Thomas Burger (Boston, MA: MIT Press, 1991).
Habermas, J?rgen. The Theory of Communicative Action Volume One: Reason and the Rationalization of Society, trans. Thomas McCarthy. (Boston, MA: Beacon Press, 1985a).
Habermas, J?rgen. 7The Kieory of Communicative Action Volume Two: Lifeworld and System-A Critique of Functionalist Reason, trans. Thomas McCarthy. (Boston, MA: Beacon Press, 1985b).
Habermas, J?rgen. Truth and Justification, trans. Barbara Fultner. (Boston, MA: MIT Press, 2005).
Hamilton, Alexander, Madison, James, and Jay, John. 7The Federalist Papers, ed. Charles R. Kesler. (New York, NY: Signet Classics, 2003).
Harper, Stephen. Right Here, Right Now: Politics and Leadership in the Age of Disruption. (Toronto, ON: Penguin Random House Canada, 2018).
Hart, H.L.A. “Between Utility and Rights.” Columbia Law Review, Vol 79, 1979.
Hart, H.L.A. 7Zfe Concept of Law: Second Edition. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1997).
Hart, H.L.A. Essays in Jurisprudence and Philosophy. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1984).
Hart, H.L.A. Law, Liberty, and Morality. (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1963).
272 Bibliography
Hart, H.L.A. “Positivism and the Separation of Law and Morals.” Harvard Law Review, Vol 71, 1958.
Hart, H.L.A. Punishment and Responsibility: Essays in the Philosophy of Law (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2008).
Hart, H.L.A. “Rawls on Liberty and its Priority.” University of Chicago Law Review, Volume 40, 1973.
Harvey, David. A Brief History of Neoliberalism. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2007).
Harvey, David. A Companion to Marx’s Capital: The Complete Edition. (London, UK: Verso Books, 2018).
Harvey, David. The Condition of Postmodernity. (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 1990).
Harvey, David. Justice, Nature, and the Geography of Difference. (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 1996).
Harvey, David. The Limits to Capital: New and Fully Updated Edition. (London, UK: Verso Books, 2006).
Hayek, F.A. The Constitution of Liberty: The Definitive Edition. (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2011).
Hayek, F.A. Law, Legislation, and Liberty. (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1978).
Hayek, F.A. The Road to Serfdom: The Definitive Edition. (Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press, 2007).
Hazony, Yoram. “Conservative Rationalism Has Failed.” The American Mind, June 24th 2019a.
Hazony, Yoram. “Conservative Democracy.” First Things, January 2019b. https://www.firstthings.com/article/2019/01/conservative-democracy.
Hazony, Yoram. The Virtue of Nationalism. (New York, NY: Basic Books, 2018).
Heidegger, Martin. The Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays. (New York, NY: Harper Perennial, 2013).
Henderson, Greig. Creating LegalWorlds: Story and Style In a Culture ofArgument. (Toronto, ON: University of Toronto Press, 2015).
Hegel, Georg W.F. The Philosophy of Right, trans. S.W Dyde. (Mineola, NY: Dover Press, 2005).
Hobbes, Thomas. Leviathan. (London, UK: Penguin Books, 1982)
Hogg, Peter and Bushell, Allison. “The Charter Dialogue Between Courts and Legislatures (Or Perhaps the Charter Isn’t Such a Bad Thing After All).” Osgoode Hall Law Journal 35 (1997).
Bibliography 273
Hogg, Peter, Bushell, Allison, and Wright, Wade. “Charter Dialogue Revisited (Or Much Ado About Metaphors).” Osgoode Hall Law Journal, 45, (2007).
Holmes, Oliver Wendell. The Common Law. (Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2009).
Holmes, Oliver Wendell. “The Path of the Law.” Harvard Law Review, 457, 1897.
Honneth, Axel. Freedom’s Right: the Social Foundations of Democratic Life, trans. Joseph Ganahl. (New York, NY: Columbia University Press, 2016).
Honneth, Axel. The Idea of Socialism. (Medford, MA: Polity Press, 2017).
Horkheimer, Max. Eclipse of Reason. (New York, NY: Continuum, 2004).
Hunt, Lynn. Inventing Human Rights: A History (New York, NY: W.W Morton a Company, 2007).
Hutchinson, Allan. Evolution and the Common Law. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2005).
Hutchinson, Allan. “Indiana Dworkin and Law’s Empire.” Yale Law Journal, Vol 96, 1987.
Hutchinson, Allan. Is Eating People Wrong?: Great Legal Cases And How They Shaped The World. (New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2011).
Hutchinson, Allan. “Judges and Politics: An Essay From Canada.” Supreme Court Law Review, 25 (2004).
Hutchinson, Allan. “A Poetic Champion Composes: Unger (Not) On Ecology and Women.” The University of Toronto Law Journal 40 (1990).
Hutchinson, Allan. Waitingfor C.O.R.A.F. (Toronto, ON: University ofToronto Press, 1995)
Ignatieff, Michael. The Rights Revolution: Second Edition. (Toronto, ON: House of Anansi Press, 2007).
Jacobs, Lesley. Pursuing Equal Opportunities: The Theory and Practice ofEgalitarian Justice. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2003).
Kamm, Frances. Ethics for Enemies: Torture, Terror, and War. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2011).
Kamm, Frances. Morality and Mortality: Volume One. (Oxford UK: Oxford University Press, 1998).
Kant, Immanuel. Critique of Judgement, trans. Nicholas Walker. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2009).
Kant, Immanuel. Critique of Pure Reason, trans. Abbott Thomas Kingsmill. (Mineola, NY: Dover Classics, 2004).
Kant, Immanuel. Critique ofPractical Reason, trans. Werner Pluhar. (Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing, 2002).
274 Bibliography
Kant, Immanuel. Groundwork to the Metaphysics of Morals, trans. H.. J Paton. (New York, NY: Harper Torchbooks, 1964).
Kant, Immanuel. The Metaphysics of Morals, trans. Mary Gregor. (United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press, 1996).
Kant, Immanuel. On History, trans. Lewis White Beck, Robert E. Anchor, and Emil. L Fackenheim. (United States: The Library of Liberal Arts, 1957).
Kant, Immanuel. Toward Perpetual Peace and Other Essays on Politics, Peace, and History, trans. David Colclasure. (New Haven, CN: Yale University Press, 2006).
Kant, Immanuel. Religion Within the Limits of Reason Alone: Revised Edition, trans. Robert Merrihew Adams. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2018).
Kateb, George. Human Dignity. (Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2011).
Keane, John. “Carl Schmitt’s Concept of the Political” Lecture Delivered at Peking University May 28th 2018. https://www.youtube.com/ watch?v=gEyFKWZFq2U.
Kelsen, Hans. General Theory of Law and State, trans. Anders Wedberg. (Cambridge, MA: The Lawbook Exchange, 2009).
Kelsen, Hans. The Pure Theory of Law, trans. Max Knight. (Clark, NJ: Lawbook Exchange Limited, 2008).
Kennedy, Duncan. “The Critique of Rights in Critical Legal Studies” in Janet Halley and Wendy Brown. Left Legalism/Left Critique. (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2002).
Kennedy, Duncan. A Critique of Adjudication (Fin De Si?cle). (Cambridge, MA. Harvard University Press, 1997).
Kennedy, Duncan. “Form and Substance in Private Law Adjudication.” Harvard Law Review, Vol 89, 1976.
Keyssar, Alexander. The Right to Vote: The Contested History of Democracy in the United States. (New York, NY: Basic Books, 2000).
King, Martin Luther. “I’ve Been To the Mountaintop: Address Delivered at Bishop Charles Mason Temple.” The Martin Luther King Jr Research and Education Center, April 1968 https://kinginstitute.stanford.edu/king-papers/ documents/ive-been-mountaintop-address-delivered-bishop-charles-mason-temple.
Kirk, Russell. The Conservative Mind. From Burke to Eliot. (Washington, DC: Gateway Editions, 2016).
Bibliography 275
Kirk, Russell. “Edmund Burke and Natural Rights.” The Imaginative Conservative, April 21st 2012. https://theimaginativeconservative.org/2012/04/russell-kirk-edmund-burke-and-natural-rights.html.
Koskenniemi, Martti. From Apology to Utopia: The Structure of International Legal Argument Reissue(Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2007).
Kramer, Matthew. H.L.A Hart: Key Contemporary Thinkers. (Cambridge, UK: Polity Press, 2018).
Kripke, Saul. Naming and Necessity. (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell, 1991).
Kymlicka, Will. “Communitarianism, Liberalism, and Superliberalism.” In the Critical Review: A Journal of Politics and Society 8 (1994).
Kymlicka, Will. “Multiculturalism’s Moral Impulse.” Carnegie Council for Ethics in International Affairs. November 25th 2014. https://www.youtube.com/ watch?v=2W689QD849Y&t=118s.
Kymlicka, Will. Multiculutral Odysseys: Navigating the New International Politics of Diversity. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2006).
Laclau, Ernesto and Mouffe, Chantal. Hegemony and Socialist Strategy: Second Edition. (London, UK. Verso Press, 2014).
Laclau, Ernesto. New Reflections on the Revolution of Our Time. (London, UK: Verso Books, 1990).
Lemke, Thomas. Foucault’s Analysis of Modern Governmentality: A Critique of Political Reason, trans. Erik Butler. (London, UK: Verso Books, 2019).
Lenin, Vladimir Ilyich. Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism. Marxists. Org, 2020. https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1916/imp-hsc/ch09.htm.
Locke, John. Second Treatise on Government. (Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing, 1980).
Lowe, Vaughan. International Law: A Very Short Introduction. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2015).
Luther, Martin. Selections From His Writings, ed. John Dillenberger. (New York, NY: Random House, 1962).
Machan, Tibor. “The Perils of Positive Rights,” Foundation for Economic Education, April 1st, 2001.
MacIntyre, Alasdair. After Virtue-A Study in Moral Theory: Third Edition (Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre-Dame Press, 2007).
MacIntyre, Alasdair. Marcuse. (Roermond, NL: Fontana, 1970).
Macintyre, Alasdair “The Virtues, the Unity of a Human Life, and the Concept of a Tradition” in Liberalism and Its Critics, ed. Michael Sandel (New York, NY: New York University Press, 1984).
276 Bibliography
MacIntyre, Alasdair. Whose Justice, Which Rationality? (Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre-Dame Press, 1989).
MacKinnon, Catharine. “Points Against Postmodernism.” Chicago-Kent Law Review, Vol 25, June 2000.
MacKinnon, Catharine. “Rape, Genocide and Women’s Human Rights.” Harvard Womens Law Journal, Vol 17, 1994.
MacKinnon, Catharine. Towards a Feminist Theory of the State. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1989).
Macklem, Patrick. “What is International Human Rights Law: Three Applications of a Distributive Account.” McGill Law Journal, 52, (2007).
Madison, James. “Federalist Number 10: The Union as a Safeguard Against Domestic Faction and Insurrection.” Bill of Rights Institute, 2020a https:// billofrightsinstitute.org/founding-documents/primary-source-documents/ the-federalist-papers/federalist-papers-no-10/.
Madison, James. “The Structure of Government Must Furnish the Proper Checks and Balances Between the Different Departments.” Bill of Rights Institute, 2020b. https://billofrightsinstitute.org/founding-documents/pri-mary-source-documents/the-federalist-papers/federalist-papers-no-51/.
Madison, James. “Federalist 55: The Total Number of the House of Representatives.” Yale Law School, 2008 https://avalon.law.yale.edu/18th_ century/fed55.asp.
Maldonado-Torres, Nelson. “The Coloniality of Human Rights.” Revista Critica de Ciencias Sociais, 2017.
Mandel, Michael. The Charter of Rights and the Legalization of Politics in Canada. (Toronto, ON: Thomspson Educational Publishing, 1994).
Marcuse, Herbert. One Dimensional Man. (Boston, MA: Beacon Press, 1964).
Marcuse, Herbert. Eros and Civilization: A Philosophical Inquiry into Freud. (Boston, MA: Beacon Press, 1974).
Marmor, Andrei. Interpretation and Legal Theory: Revised Second Edition. (Oxford, UK: Hart Publishing, 2005).
Martin, Robert Ivan. The Most Dangerous Branch: How the Supreme Court of Canada has Undermined our Law and our Democracy. (Montreal, Quebec: McGill-Queens University Press, 2003).
Marx, Karl. Capital Volume One: A Critique of Political Economy, trans. Ernest Mandel (London, UK: Penguin Books, 1990).
Marx, Karl. Capital Volume Two: A Critique of Political Economy, trans. Ernest Mandel. (London, UK: Penguin Books, 1993a).
Bibliography 277
Marx, Karl. Capital Volume Three: A Critique of Political Economy, trans. Ernest Mandel. (London, UK: Penguin Books, 1993c).
Marx, Karl and Engels, Friedrich. The Communist Manifesto. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2008).
Marx, Karl. “Critique of the Gotha Program.” May, 1875. Available at https:// www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1875/gotha/index.htm.
Marx, Karl. Early Writings, trans. Rodney Livingstone. (London, UK: Penguin Classics, 1992).
Marx, Karl and Engels, Friedrich. The German Ideology. (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1998).
Marx, Karl. Grundrisse: Introduction to the Critique of Political Economy. (London, UK: Penguin Books, 1973).
May, Todd. Gilles Deleuze: An Introduction. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2005).
McAfee, Noelle. Habermas, Kristeva, and Citizenship. (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2000).
McCarthy, Thomas. The Critical Theory of Jurgen Habermas. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1978).
McManus, Matthew. “A Critical Legal Conception of Human Dignity.” Journal of Human Rights, Online, 2019a.
McManus, Matthew. Making Human Dignity Central to International Human Rights Law: A Critical Legal Argument. (Cardiff, UK: University of Wales Press, 2019b).
McManus, Matthew. The Rise of Post-Modern Conservatism: Neoliberalism, PostModern Culture, and Reactionary Politics. (Gewerbestrasse, SW: Palgrave Macmillan, 2019c).
McManus, Matthew. “Science, Philosophy, and the Return of Time: Reflections on Speculative Thought.” Cosmos and History, Vol 13 (3), December 2017.
McManus, Matthew. What is Post-Modern Conservatism: Essays on Our Hugely Tremendous Times. (Winchester, UK: Zero Books, 2019d).
McNeilly, Kathryn. “After the Critique of Rights: For a Radical Democratic Theory and Practice of Human Rights.” Law and Critique, Vol 27, 2016.
El Mercurio. “Interview with F.A Hayek.” ElMercurio, April 12th 1981.
Merry, Sally Engle. Getting Justice and Getting Even: Legal Consciousness Among Working-Class Americans. (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1990).
Meyer, Frank S. In Defense of Freedom and Related Essays: With A Foreword by William C. Dennis. (Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Fund, 1996).
278 Bibliography
Mill, John Stuart. On Liberty and Other Essays, ed. John Gray. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2008).
Mill, John Stuart. On The Subjection of Women, reprinted. In Richard Vandewetering and Lesley Jacobs. John Stuart Mill’s The Subjection of Women: His Contemporary and Modern Critics. (Delmar, NY: Caravan Books, 1999).
Miller, John G. “The House of Jaffa.” The National Review, January 12, 2015.
Mirandola, Giovanni. n.d. “Oration on the Dignity of Man” trans. Available online. http://web.mnstate.edu/gracyk/courses/web%20publishing/pico_ oration.htm.
Montesquieu, Charles de Secondat. The Spirit of the Laws, trans. Thomas Nugent. (New York, NY: Batoche Books, Kitchener, 2001).
Morton, F.L. and Knopff, Rainer. The Charter Revolution and the Court Party. (Toronto, ON: University of Toronto Press, 2000).
Moyn, Samuel. The Last Utopia: Human Rights in History. (Cambridge, MA. Harvard University Press, 2012).
Moyn, Samuel. “The Secret History of Constitutional Dignity.” Yale Human Rights and Development Journal, 17, (2014).
Nagel, Thomas. Equality and Partiality. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1991).
Nagel, Thomas. “What We Owe A Rabbit.” New York Review of Books, March 21, 2019. https://www.nybooks.com/articles/2019/03/21/christine-korsgaard-what-we-owe-a-rabbit/.
Nicholas, Jeff. Reason, Tradition, and the Good: Macintyre’s Tradition Constituted Reason and Frankfurt School Critical Theory. (Notre-Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 2012).
Nietzsche, Friedrich. Basic Writings of Nietzsche, trans. Walter Kaufmann. (New York, NY: The Modern Library, 2000).
Nietzsche, Friedrich. The Gay Science: With A Prelude in Rhymes and an Appendix in Songs, trans. Walter Kaufmann. (New York, NY: Random House, 1974).
Nietzsche, Friedrich. On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life. Peter Preuss trans (Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1980).
Nozick, Robert. Anarchy, State, and Utopia. (New York, NY: Basic Books, 1974).
Nozick, Robert. The Examined Life: Philosophical Meditations. (New York, NY: Simon and Schuster, 1989).
Nozick, Robert and Sanchez, Julian. “Robert Nozick’s Final Interview.” Libertarianism.Org, July 26th 2001. https://www.libertarianism.org/publica-tions/essays/robert-nozicks-final-interview.
Bibliography 279
Nussbaum, Martha. Creating Capabilities: The Human Development Approach. (Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2011).
Nussbaum, Martha. Frontiers of Justice: Disability, Nationality, Species Membership. (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 2006).
Nussbaum, Martha. Not for Profit: Why Democracy Needs the Humanities. (Princeton, NJ. Princeton University Press, 2012).
Nussbaum, Martha. Political Emotions: Why Love Matters for Justice. (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2013).
Nussbaum, Martha. “Political Liberalism and Respect: A Response to Linda Barclay.” SATS: The Northern European Journal of Philosophy 4 (2003).
Nussbaum, Martha. Sex and Social Justice. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2000).
Oakeshott, Michael. Rationalism in Politics and Other Essays: New And Expanded Edition. (Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Press, 1991).
Oakeshott, Michael. The Politics of Faith and the Politics of Skepticism. (New Haven, CN: Yale University Press, 1996).
Ostaric, Lara. Interpreting Schelling: Critical Essays. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2014).
Oyowe, Antony Oritsegbubemi. “An African Conception of Human Rights?: Comments on the Challenges of Relativism.” Human Rights Review, Vol 15, 2014.
Parfit, Derek. On What Matters: Volume One. (Oxford, UK. Oxford University Press, 2013a).
Parfit, Derek. On What Matters: Volume Two. (Oxford, UK. Oxford University Press, 2013b).
Parfit, Derek. On What Matters: Volume Three. (Oxford, UK. Oxford University Press, 2017).
Parfit, Derek. “Personal Identity.” Philosophical Review, Vol 80, 1971.
Parfit, Derek. Reasons and Persons. (Oxford, UK. Oxford University Press, 1986).
Peterson, Jordan. 12 Rules to Life: An Antidote to Chaos. (Toronto, ON: Random House Canada, 2018).
Petter, Andrew. The Politics of the Charter: The Illusive Promise of Constitutional Rights. (Toronto, ON: The University of Toronto Press, 2010).
The Piketty Line. “How the Decline of Unions Will Shape America.” The Economist, July 10th 2018 https://www.economist.com/united-states/2018/07/19/how-the-decline-of-unions-will-change-america.
Piketty, Thomas. Capital and Ideology. (Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2020).
280 Bibliography
Piketty, Thomas. Capital in the Twenty-First Century, trans. Arthur Goldhammer. (Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2014).
Pinker, Steven. “The Stupidity of Dignity.” 7Zfe New Republic, May 28th 2008.
Plato. The Republic, trans. G.M.A Grube. (Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing, 1992).
Popper, Karl. 7Zfe Open Society and Its Enemies: One Volume Edition. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2013).
Posner, Richard. %e Economics of Justice: Second Edition. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1983).
Prithchard, Michael S. “Human Dignity and Justice.” Ethics, Vol 82, 1972.
Quataert, Jean H. Advocating Dignity: Human Rights Mobilizations in Global Politics. (Philadelphia, PA. University of Philadelphia Press, 2009).
Rawls, John. “The Idea of Public Reason Revisited.” 7Zfe University of Chicago Law Review. Vol 64, 1997.
Rawls, John. Justice as Fairness: A Restatement. (Cambridge, MA. The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2001a).
Rawls, John. 7Zfe Law of Peoples: With the “Idea of Public Reason Revisited.” (United States: Harvard University Press, 2001b).
Rawls, John. Lectures on the History of Political Philosophy. (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2008).
Rawls, John. Political Liberalism (New York, NY: Columbia University Press, 1993).
Rawls, John. A %eory of Justice: Revised Edition. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999).
Raz, Joseph. %e Authority of Law: Second Edition. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2009).
Raz, Joseph. Between Authority and Interpretation: On the 7Zfeory of Law and Practical Reason. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2010).
Razack, Sherene. 7Zfe Eviction of Muslims from Western Law and Politics. (Toronto, ON: University of Toronto Press, 2008).
Ripstein, Arthur. Force and Agency: Kant’s Legal and Political Philosophy. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009).
Roach, Kent. %e Supreme Court on Trial: Judicial Activism of Democratic Dialogue. (Toronto, ON: Irwin Law, 2001).
Roine, Jesper. Pocket Piketty. (Toronto, ON: Between the Lines, 2017).
Robin, Corey. %e Enigma of Clarence 7Zfomas. (New York, NY: Metropolitan Books, 2019).
Bibliography 281
Robin, Corey. 7Zfe Reactionary Mind Second Edition: Conservatism from Edmund Burke to Donald Trump. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2018).
Ropke, Willhelm. “South Africa: An Attempt at a Positive Appraisal,” Schweizer Monatsheft, No. 2, May 1964.
Rorty, Richard. Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1989a).
Rorty, Richard. Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1981).
Rorty, Richard. Philosophy and Social Hope. (London, UK: Penguin Books, 1999).
Rorty, Richard. “Solidarity and Objectivity” in Relativism: Interpretation and Confrontation, ed. Michael Krauscz. (Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre-Dame Press, 1989b).
Rosen, Jeffrey. “What Made Antonin Scalia Great.” In 7Zie Atlantic. February 15, 2016.
Rosen, Michael. Dignity: Its Meaning and History. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2012).
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques. %e First and Second Discourses, trans. Roger D. Masters and Judith R. Masters (Boston, MA: Bedford-St. Martins, 1964).
Rousseau, Jean Jacques. 7ZfeSocial Contract. (London, UK: Penguin Books, 1968).
Sandel, Michael. Justice: What’s the Right 7Zfing to Do? (New York, NY: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2009).
Sandel, Michael. “From Market Economy to Market Society: IQ2 Talks.” YouTube Video, 10:57, June 22, 2012, https://www.youtube.com/ watch?v=kvPNS4577MA.
Sandel, Michael. Liberalism and the Limits of Justice: Second Edition. (Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press, 1998a).
Sandel, Michael. “What Money Can’t Buy: The Tanner Lectures.” (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1998b).
Scalia, Antonin. A Matter of Interpretation: Federal Courts and the Law. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997).
Scanlon, T.M. What We Owe Each Other: Revised Edition. (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2000).
Scanlon, T.M. Why Does Inequality Matter? (Oxford, UK. Oxford University Press, 2018).
Scheffler, Samuel. Human Morality. (Oxford, UK. Oxford University Press, 1992).
Schlag, Pierre. “The Empty Circles of Liberal Justification.” Michigan Law Review 96 (1997).
282 Bibliography
Schlag, Pierre. “Normativity and the Politics of Form.” University of Pennsylvania Law Review, Vol 139, 1991.
Schlag, Pierre. 7Zfe Enchantment of Reason. (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1998).
Schmitt, Carl. %e Concept of the Political (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1996).
Schmitt, Carl. %e Concept of the Political: Expanded Edition. (Chicago, IL. The University of Chicago Press, 2007).
Schmitt, Carl. Constitutional %eory, trans. Jeffrey Seitzer. (Durham, NC. Duke University Press, 2008a).
Schmitt, Carl. %e Leviathan in the State 7Zfeory of Thomas Hobbes. (Chicago, IL. The University of Chicago Press, 2008b).
Schmitt, Carl. %e Nomos of the Earth in the International Law of Jus Publicum Europeaum. (Candor, NY: Telos Press, 2006).
Schmitt, Carl. Political Geology. (Chicago, IL. The University of Chicago Press, 2005).
Schneewind, J.B. 7Zfe Invention of Autonomy: A History of Modern Moral Philosophy. (Cambridge, UK. Cambridge University Press, 1998).
Scruton, Roger. Fools, Frauds, and Firebrands: linkers of the New Left. (London, UK: Bloomsbury Continuum, 2015).
Scruton, Roger. Conservatism: An Invitation to the Great Tradition. (New York, NY. All Points Books, 2017).
Scruton, Roger. How to Be a Conservative. (London, UK: Bloomsbury Continuum, 2014).
Sen, Amartya. Commodities and Capabilities. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1999a).
Sen, Amartya. Development as Freedom. (New York, NY: Anchor Books, 1999b).
Sen, Amartya. The Idea of Justice. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009).
Sen, Amartya. Inequality Re-Examined. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1992).
Sen, Amartya. “Isolation, Assurance, and the Social Rate of Discount.” In the Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol 81 (1).
Shapiro, Ian. “The Burkean Outlook.” Yale Courses, April 6th 2011a. https:// www.youtube.com/watch?v=hkDqadw-fJE&list=PL2FD48CE33DFBEA7E &index=19.
Bibliography 283
Shapiro, Ian. “Demise of the Neoconservative Dream From Afghanistan to Iraq.” Yale Courses, November 15th 2019a. https://www.youtube.com/ watch?v=LiyeOcdBYnM.
Shapiro, Ian. 7Zfe Moral Foundations of Politics. (New Haven, CN: Yale University Press, 2003).
Shapiro, Ian. “Privatizing Government I: Utilities, Eminent Doman, and Local Government.” Power and Politics, Yale University Courses, October 17th 2019b https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9dULs7w8b-0&list=PLh9mgdi 4rNeyViG2ar68jkgEi4y6doNZy&index=8.
Shapiro, Scott. Legality. (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2011b).
Shelby, Tommie. “Justice, Deviance, and the Dark Ghetto.” Philosophy and Public Affairs, Vol 35, 2007
Sidgwick, Henry. 7Zfe Methods of Ethics. (Indianapolis, Indiana. Hackett Press, 1981).
Singer, Peter. The Most Good You Can Do: How Effective Altruism Is Changing Ideas About Living Ethically. (New Haven, CN: Yale University Press, 2016).
Simons, Kenneth. “Dworkin’s Two Principles of Dignity: An Unsatisfactory Nonconsequentialist Account of Interpersonal Moral Duties.” Boston University Law Review, 90, (2010).
Slobodian, Quinn. Globalists: %e End of Empire and the Birth of Neoliberalism. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2018).
Smith, Adam. An Inquiry Into the Nature and Cause of the Wealth of Nations: Selected Edition. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2008).
Spivak, Gayatri. “Righting Wrongs.” 7Zie South Atlantic Quarterly, Vol 103, 2004.
Strauss, Leo. Natural Right and History. (Chicago, IL. University of Chicago Press, 1953).
Taylor, Charles. Multiculturalism and the ‘Politics of Recognition’: An Essay With Commentary. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1992).
Taylor, Charles. A Secular Age. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2007).
Thatcher, Margaret. “Confidence in Her Majesty’s Government Speech.” Margaret Catcher Foundation. November 22nd 1990. https://www.marga-retthatcher.org/document/108256.
Catcher, Margaret. “Speech to Conservative Central Council.” March 15 th 1975 https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/102655.
Tillich, Paul. 7Zfe Dynamics of Faith. (New York, NY: HarperCollins, 2009).
284 Bibliography
Toth, Csaba. “Full text of Victor Orban’s speech at B?ile Tu§nad (Tusnadf?rd?) of 26 July 2014.” The Budapest Beacon, July 29th 2014. https://budapestbea-con.com/full-text-of-viktor-orbans-speech-at-baile-tusnad-tusnadfurdo-of-26-july-2014/.
Tribe, Lawrence. The Invisible Constitution. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2008).
Tribe, Lawrence. “The Scalia Myth.” in The New York Review of Books, February 27th, 2016.
Tuck, Richard. Hobbes: A Very Short Introduction. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2002).
Tully, James. Strange Multiplicity: Constitutionalism in An Age of Diversity. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1995).
Unger, Roberto. The Critical Legal Studies Movement: Another Time, Another Task. (Cambridge, MA. Harvard University Press, 2015).
Unger, Roberto. Knowledge and Politics. (New York, NY: The Free Press, 1973).
Unger, Roberto. “A Mystery Demystified: The Connection Between Mathematics and Physics” http://robertounger.com/english/pdfs/MATHEMATICS_ AND_PHYSICS1.pdf.
Unger, Roberto. Politics Volume One: False Necessity. (London, UK: Verso Press, 2004a).
Unger, Roberto. Politics Volume Two: Social Theory {Its Situation and Its Task} (London, UK: Verso Press, 2004b).
Unger, Roberto. Politics Volume Three: Plasticity Into Power (Comparative-Historical Studies on the Institutional Conditions of Economic and Military Success). (London, UK: Verso Press, 2004c).
Unger, Roberto. Passion: An Essay on Personality. (London, UK: The Free Press, 1986).
Unger, Roberto. The Self Awakened: Pragmatism Unbound. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2007).
Unger, Roberto and Smolin, Lee. The Singular Universe and the Reality of Time: A Proposal in Natural Philosophy. (Cambridge, UK Cambridge University Press, 2014).
Unger, Roberto. What Should the Left Propose? (London, UK: Verso Press, 2005).
Ward, Ian. Introduction to Critical Legal Theory: Second Edition (New York, NY: Routledge-Cavendish, 2004).
Waldron, Jeremy. Dignity, Rank, and Rights. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2015).
Bibliography 285
Waldron, Jeremy. Dignity, Rank, and Rights: 7Zfe Tanner Lectures on Human Value. Delivered at UC Berkeley, April 21—23, (2009).
Waldron, Jeremy. Liberal Rights: Collected Papers 1981—1991 (United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press, 1993).
Waldron, Jeremy. “Torture and Positive Law: Jurisprudence for the Whitehouse” Colombia Law Review, 105 (2005).
Walzer, Michael. Spheres of Justice: A Defence of Pluralism and Equality. (New York, NY: Basic Books, 1983).
Weber, Max. Economy and Society, trans. Keith Tribe. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2019).
Weber, Max. %e Protestant Work Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, trans. Talcott Parsons. (Mineola, NY: Dover Publications, 1958).
Weber, Max. %e Vocation Lectures, trans. Tracy B. Strong. (Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing, 2004).
West, Cornell. “America is Spiritually Bankrupt: We Must Fight Back Together.” 7Zfe Guardian, January 2018 https://www.theguardian.com/commentis-free/2018/jan/14/america-is-spiritually-bankrupt-we-must-fight-back-together.
Whyte, Jessica. 7Zfe Morals of the Market: Human Rights and the Rise of Neoliberalism. (London, UK: Verso Books, 2019).
Williams, Bernard. Morality: An Introduction to Ethics. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2012).
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. On Certainty, trans. Dennis Paul and G.E.M Anscombe (New York, NY: Harper, Torchbooks, 1969).
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. Philosophical Investigations, trans. G.E.M Anscombe, P.M.S Hacker, Joachim Schulte. (Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing, 2001a).
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, trans. D.F Pears and B.F McGuinness. (London, UK: Routledge, 2001b).
Wolin, Sheldon. Democracy Inc: Managed Democracy and the Specter of Inverted Totalitarianism. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2008).
Wollstonecraft, Mary. A Vindication of the Rights of Women. (New York, NY: Norton Library, 1967).
Wood, Allen. Kant’s Ethical K/ought. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1999).
Zizek, Slavoj. “Against Human Rights.” New Left Review, Vol 34, 2005.
Zizek, Slavoj. “Berlusconi in Tehran.” London Review of Books, July 2009.
Zizek, Slavoj. Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Lacan But Were Afraid to Ask Hitchcock. (London, UK: Verso Books, 1992).
286 Bibliography
Zizek, Slavoj. “In the Wake of the Paris Attacks the West Must Embrace Its Radical Western Roots.” In ?/ese Times, November 16th 2013, http://inthe-setimes.com/article/18603/breaking-the-taboos-in-the-wake-of-paris-attacks-the-left-must-embrace-its.
Zizek, Slavoj. Less than Nothing: Hegel and the Shadow of Dialectical Materialism. (London, UK: Verso Press, 2012).
Zizek, Slavoj. “Liberal Multiculturalism Masks an Old Barbarism With A Human Face.” ?/e Guardian. October 3rd, 2010 https://www.theguardian. com/commentisfree/2010/oct/03/immigration-policy-roma-rightwing-europe.
Zizek, Slavoj. “The Obscenity of Human Rights: Violence as Symptom.” May 4th, 2006a https://www.lacan.com/zizviol.htm.
Zizek, Slavoj. ?/e Parallax View. (Boston, MA: MIT Press, 2006b).
Zizek, Slavoj. K>e Plague of Fantasies. (London, UK: Verso Books, 1997).
Zizek, Slavoj. ?/e Ticklish Subject: ?/e Absent Center of Political Ontology. (London, UK: Verso Books, 1999).
Index1
A
Arendt, Hannah, 43, 89
Barak, Aharon, 38n58, 185 Benhabib, Seyla, 154—161, 159n53, 171 Bergson, Henri, 164, 164n64, 227, 250-253, 260 Berlin, Isaiah, xvii, 69, 69n6, 109, 119, 158 Brown, Wendy, 56, 61, 115,
117, 155n40
Capabilities approach, 179, 180, 210 Critical legal studies, 97, 100, 107, 163, 165n65, 220, 221, 248
Deleuze, Gilles, 164, 227, 250-253, 260 Deliberative democracy, 155, 156, 158-161, 185 Deneen, Patrick, xix, 16n19,
106, 121, 122, 126-132, 128n128, 135, 143,
157, 157n45, 192,
195, 215, 224 Dignity
history, 147n22, 172 Dworkin, Ronald, 34, 98n63, 114n99, 116, 144, 145, 155, 158, 164, 170,
170n5, 177, 189, 206,
207, 209, 211, 223,
224, 236, 242-248,
253, 256
D
B
C
1 Note: Page numbers followed by ‘n’ refer to notes.
© The Author(s) 2020	2	87
M. McManus, A Critical Legal Examination of Liberalism and Liberal Rights, Palgrave Studies in Classical Liberalism, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3'030'61025'8
288 Index
F
Finnis, John, 164, 192-194,
193n48, 194n49, 196, 207 Freedom
social, 64, 73, 116, 155, 158, 159, 175, 185, 188, 193n48, 199, 213, 218, 246, 248 substantial, 218
H
Habermas, Jurgen, 154-161, 157n43, 157n44, 159n52, 171, 219, 241 Hart, H.L.A., 26, 42-51, 46n69, 48n73, 98, 98n62, 164, 224, 228, 236-246, 237n20, 238n22, 239n25, 248, 255 Hayek, F.A., 26n34, 52, 54,
56n87, 57-59, 62, 64,
151, 153, 153n36, 161,
204, 218 Hazony, Yoram, xix, 30, 106, 121-126, 122-123n121, 130-132, 135, 196 Honneth, Axel, 73, 154-161 Hutchinson, Allan, 155,
155n40, 180
K
Kant, Immanuel, 12, 32-44, 33n45, 33n47, 35n54, 37n56, 38n60, 41n63, 51, 62, 67, 72, 73, 95, 102, 104, 122, 123n121, 138, 146, 156, 170, 172, 173, 178, 178n18, 183, 184, 187, 188n35, 196, 219, 223-225, 250, 253n47
L
Legal theory, 99, 186, 223, 224, 249, 256 Locke, John, 6, 8, 13n13, 22-32, 23n30, 24n31, 27n36, 36-38, 41, 51, 67, 69-73, 75, 95, 127, 146, 161, 189, 223
M
MacKinnon, Catherine,
112-118, 115n100 Marx, Karl, xix, 25n34, 36n55, 42, 43n65, 48n74, 71n8, 78-83, 80n25, 85n38, 89, 112, 114, 134, 145, 147, 156, 160, 163, 174, 221, 249 Mill, J.S., xvii, xix, 42-52, 67, 95, 99n64, 100, 111, 126
N
Neoliberalism, 7, 55-58, 61-65,
110, 111, 120, 161, 260 Nozick, Robert, 25n34, 142, 142n9, 148-151, 150n28, 151n29, 161, 187, 188, 241 Nussbaum, Martha, 41n63, 112, 117, 144, 145, 161, 178-180, 179n19, 209n64,210
P
Positivism, 42, 45, 48, 51, 97, 124, 193, 223, 233-238, 233n15, 242-244, 255 Post-modern conservatism, xix, 3, 65, 88-89, 106, 118-133, 162, 222
Index 289
R
Rawls, John, xix, xxi, 14, 48, 52, 95n53, 102, 116, 127, 138-144, 139n3, 147, 148, 150, 154, 155, 158, 161,
163, 170, 201, 204,
206, 207, 209, 212,
219, 227n8 Rights
democratic, xiii, xv, xix, xx, 4,
64, 84, 89, 111, 162, 164,
182, 184-187, 189-191, 196-200, 209, 210,
213, 220, 245, 257,
259, 260 egalitarian, 21, 52, 119, 154, 180, 182, 185, 205
S
Schmitt, Carl, 21n26, 69, 72, 74, 92-97, 95n53, 134, 227n8 Sen, Amartya, 5, 5n2, 6, 12, 144, 145, 155, 161, 178-180, 209n64, 210, 211n67
U
Unger, Roberto, 97, 100-102,
100n65, 105, 106, 134, 163, 173-175, 174-175n13, 249-253, 259, 260
Z
Zizek, Slavoj, 78-88, 120n112, 200