Chapter 8
Heroes Yet Criminals of the German Computer Revolution
Kai Denker
When in 1984 Herwart “Wau” Holland and Steffen Wernery announced their “hack” of Germany’s  Bildschirmtext (Btx,1 an interactive teletext system), they rattled the operator, Deutsche  Bundespost (DBP, Germany’s Federal Mail), who had promoted Btx as a secure and reliable  technology for business and homes. Btx had failed to meet the DBP’s initial high  expectations, and although some banks and companies started using the system, home consumers  were reluctant to adopt it. Hackers succeeded in manipulating electronic mail and tracing  passwords. By denying the flaws, DBP ignored the hackers’ contribution in tracing bugs in the  system. According to Holland and Wernery, the DBP’s arrogant behavior provoked them to  publicize their “hack.” In November 1984, the hackers found the password for Hamburger  Sparkasse (HASPA, Hamburg’s savings bank) and by manipulating its Btx account with DBP,  transferred DM 135,000 to their own account in just one night. The next day, they held a news  conference to announce this “bank robbery” to Hamburg’s data protection commissioner.  Exposed, DBP tried to blame the debacle on the hackers. Yet, the media cheered for Holland  and Wernery.
1 The Deutsche Bundespost modeled Btx on the UK system PRESTEL and the French Minitel, which  both had been designed and rolled out in their respective countries during the late 1970s.  PRESTEL has also been the inspiration for the system Viewtron which has been offered by the  companies Knight-Ridder and AT&T in the USA between 1983 and 1986. Like eventually Btx and  PRESTEL, Viewtron failed to meet the expectations and is now regarded as an economical  failure. However, their common screen-oriented design patterns—from 24 characters in 40 lines  up to simple, yet colorful graphics—survived in the different teletext systems. Developed as  standard for teletext informations broadcasted over television signals in the UK in the  1970s, European and American television companies adopted it in different incarnations during  the 1980s—as World System Teletext (WST) in the USA and as Videotext in Germany, for  instance. Again while Videotext soon gained momentum in Europe where it is still popular  today, only a few WST services took root in the USA.
K. Denker (*)
Department of Philosophy, Technische Universitдt Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany e-mail:  denker@phil.tu-darmstadt.de
G. Alberts and R. Oldenziel (eds.), Hacking Europe. From Computer Cultures	167
to Demoscenes, History of Computing, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4471-5493-8_8,
© Springer-Verlag London 2014
                                     *168*
K. Denker
Four years later the climate had changed. When arriving in France for a conference in 1988,  Wernery was arrested for computer crimes. In 1986/87, when a bug in VAX computers used by  public authorities like NASA and research companies was discovered, hackers exploited the bug  to log on and access the computers of research facilities and companies throughout Europe.  The companies alleged that some hackers had copied and destroyed data on over 100 computers.  But when they got way over their head in their hacking activities, they anonymously contacted  Chaos Computer Club (CCC) for help.2 Holland had founded this hacker computer organization in  1982 and Wernery soon became the Club’s spokesperson. When the Club notified Germany’s  Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution, it ignored the warnings. Nevertheless,  a preliminary investigation was started to find out the hackers’ identity. The incident  raised interest outside Germany, and Wernery was one of the suspects. This time, the media  did not applaud him. Instead, the notion that hacking was an actual criminal act had taken  hold, resulting in state repression and increasingly harsh media reactions.
The representational shift from hackers being some kind of consumer protection activists to  becoming criminals occurred in a surprisingly short space of time. Legal discourses that  initially took hacking into consideration subsequently marginalized it as a hobby that had to  be restricted in order to protect society at large. To analyze these developments, I trace  the beginnings of hacking to a counterculture and its ambivalent connections between public  and legal discourses that highlighted the USA’s hacking roots and computer crimes.
The chapter discusses German computer countercultures in the 1980s in general and the Club’s  early days in particular. Firstly I explain how the Club started and its concept of hacking.  Then I consider the “Btx hack” in order to examine the Club’s self-representation of  hacktivism—a portmanteau term combining “hacking” and “activism”—as a leftist progressive  idea and to trace its criminalization in the public arena. I analyze criminalization by  exploring computer crime legislation in the mid-1980s, when hackers were first considered  consumer protection activists before being regarded or ignored as mere hobbyists or even as  criminals—an image then emerging in the USA. I will summarize my findings in relation to  their impact on hacktivism as a more and more institutionalized movement.
In contrast to the widely discussed American hackers, there is little literature dealing with  their German counterparts.3 Moreover, such biased accounts are often written by hacking  activists looking for their own roots. This is especially true for the literature on the  German hacker culture of the 1980s, when most hacker journals
2 I will refer to the Chaos Computer Club as “the Club” subsequently.
3An example of literature on American hackers is by, Steven Levy. 1984. Hackers: Heroes of  the computer revolution. Garden City, NY: Anchor Press/Doubleday. There are many hints  suggesting that the German hacker culture had access to a rich number of manifests,  statements, etc. of American hackers that circulated through international networks. However,  in the German press, one finds only a few references to such, American journals like TAP,  novels like John Brunner. 1975. Shockwave rider. New York: Harper & Row and William Gibson.  1984. Neuromancer. New York: Ace Books, and science-fiction films like John Badham’s War  Games (1983) for instance. While all these suggest that hacker connections were strong, most  can only be found ex post.
8 Heroes Yet Criminals of the German Computer Revolution
                                     *169*
and statements appeared. The Club’s journal Datenschleuder, published since 1984, serves as  the main source for this chapter. In addition to technical specifications and findings, this  journal contains political statements on hacktivism and new technological developments.4  Moreover, I use the protocols of the Bundestag and its Committee on Legal Affairs to analyze  hackers’ criminalization.5 There are also many articles in secondary research dealing with  legal or market issues.6
4 Most issues of Datenschleuder can be found on the Club’s website, Last accessed 26 Apr  2011, http://ds.ccc.de/. However, some early issues are not available online, but can be  found in local hackers’ archives. Some of the journal’s articles have been republished in the  Hackerbibel and Chaos Computer Buch. Wau Holland, et al. (eds.). 1985. Die Hackerbibel.  Lцhrbach: Pieper Werner Medienexp.; Jьrgen Wieckmann (ed.). 1988. Das Chaos Computer Buch.  Hacking made in Germany. Reinbek bei Hamburg: Wunderlich. In addition to radio recordings  accessible through the Club’s media archive. Accessed 30 Apr 2011, http://media.ccc.de/, a  biography on the Club’s co-founder Wau Holland written by Daniel Kulla. 2003. Der  Phrasenprьfer. Szenen aus dem Leben von Wau Holland. Lцhrbach: Pieper and the Grьne Kraft;  which, as an example of activist literature, appears rather hagiographic, and articles on the  Club’s history, for example Thomas Ammann. 1988. Nach uns die Zukunft. Aus der Geschichte des  Chaos Computer Clubs. In Das Chaos Computer Buch. Hacking made in Germany, ed. Jьrgen  Wieckmann, 9-31. Reinbek bei Hamburg: Wunderlich.
5 Bundestag, Bundesrat, and Drucksachen protocols (parliamentary documents) are available on  http://www.bundestag.de/. Accessed 30 Apr 2011. Rather than considering laws as the very  essence of criminalization, I treat them as the concrete expression of an underlying  discourse that can be studied in these protocols.
6 For example, studies published in the Btx-Reihe series of the Studiengruppe Bildschirmtext:  one volume dealt with Btx from a behavioral science perspective written by Ludwig  Wiesenbauer. 1983. Verhaltenswissenschaftliche Grundlagen der Bildschirmtextbenutzung,  Schriftenreihe der Studiengruppe Bildschirmtext. Grцbenzell: Fischer, followed by studies in  human resources management, for example, Dirk Stolte. 1983. Personalsuche und  Personalvermittlung mit Bildschirmtext, Schriftenreihe der Studiengruppe Bildschirmtext.  Grцbenzell: Fischer; on banking by Christoph Warnecke. 1983. Bildschirmtext und dessen  Einsatz bei Kreditinstituten, Schriftenreihe der Studiengruppe Bildschirmtext. Grцbenzell:  Fischer; or consumer research by Rolf Ulrich Kaps. 1983. Die Wirkung von Bildschirmtext auf  das Informationsverhalten der Konsumenten, Schriftenreihe der Studiengruppe Bildschirmtext.  Grцbenzell: Fischer. The latter publication was accepted as dissertation. Btx was accepted as  field of research in universities. For example, the Ruhr-Universitдt Bochum set up a project  group Bildschirmtext which published analyses of group discussions: Helmut Kromrey, et al.  1984. Bochumer Untersuchung im Rahmen der wissenschaftlichen Begleitung des Feldversuchs  Bildschirmtext Dьsseldorf/Neuss. Bochum: Ruhr-Universitдt. Some monographs compare it to its  French counterpart, Minitel. For instance, Rudolf Pospischil. 1987. Bildschirmtext in  Frankreich und Deutschland: Grundlagen u. Konzeptionen. Nьrnberg: Verlag der  Kommunikationswissenschaftlichen Forschungsvereinigung; or Manfred Friesinger. 1989.  Bildschirmtext in Frankreich. Mьnchen: Fischer. Btx is often forgotten as a mere predecessor  of the Internet. For Btx’s legal problems, see Wolf-Dieter Kuhlmann. 1985. Rechtsfragen des  Bildschirmtext-Staatsvertrages vom 18. Mдrz 1983. PhD thesis, Universitдt Bochum; Hans-Peter  Bach. 1985. Verfassungsrechtliche Grundfragen von Bildschirmtext. PhD thesis, University of  Mainz; and Bernd M. Traut. 1987. Rechtsfragen zu Bildschirmtext. Mьnchen: R. Fischer. For a  more recent discussion of German computer laws see Ralf Dietrich. 2009. Das Erfordernis der  besonderen Sicherung im StGB am Beispiel des Ausspдhens von Daten, [Para] 202a StGB: Kritik  und spezialprдventiver Ansatz,. PhD thesis, Universitat Tьbingen.
                                     *170*
K. Denker
8.1	Organizing Chaos Computer Club
While never the only hackers’ organization in Germany, the Club has been the biggest and  undoubtedly the most influential computer club since its establishment in spring 1984. Among  hackers, the Club succeeded in becoming the dominant group, already attracting attention from  the media and officials in the 1980s, when hacking attacks, computer crimes, or critical  reflection of the new and emerging computer technology became newsworthy.
In his 1988 article on the Club’s history, Thomas Ammann argues that the movie War Games and  an interview with the American hacker Richard Cheshire inspired hacking in Germany.7 In the  movie, influential with young computer enthusiasts at that time, an artificially intelligent  machine takes control of thermonuclear weapons and plans to start a war. A young hacker tries  to stop the machine but fails. Finally, the machine concludes “What a strange game! The only  winning move is not to play” and then decides to cancel the war. In the interview Cheshire  gave the journal Der Spiegel in 1983, he explained some technologies displayed in the movie  and confirmed that American hackers actually used them. Ammann suggested that German hackers  identified themselves with what was depicted in the movie as Cheshire did. According to their  interpretation, the movie emphasized the dangers of a networked computing era.
Ammann introduced Holland as a charming but behind-the-times hippie who irritated his left- wing peers through his enthusiasm for the technology and its potential.8 Holland’s enthusiasm  was indeed quite ambivalent: in an early article in the newspaper die tageszeitung (taz) in  1981, he criticized computer technology as an instrument both of homeland security and for  economizing the workplace by replacing recalcitrant employees with for never striking  computers. Still, he believed meaningful things were possible with microcomputers that did  not need centralized mainframes. He requested what he called his fellow computer freaks to  end the scurrying and to meet him at taz headquarters to discuss issues like data laws,  copyrights, and encryption.9 Holland sought to question the very idea of security and a safe  society to show that “there are no guarantees.”10 Holland also wanted to carry out “therapy”  on the German security fetish and “rotten peace” with what he called a strategy of “positive  chaos.” Although Kulla was obviously sympathetic, his
7Ammann, Nach uns die Zukunft; see also: “Zack, bin ich drin in dem System,” interview with  Richard Cheshire in Der Spiegel 46(1983), 222.
8 The connections to Adorno and Horkheimer’s concept of administration and ideas in the 1968  era are evident. While Holland’s references to leftist theories are obvious, they are still  poorly investigated. Presumably, he read Herbert Marcuse’s One-dimensional man. Boston:  Beacon Press (1964), Theodor W. Adorno, and Max Horkheimer’s Dialectic of enlightenment. New  York: Seabury Press (1972) and Max Horkheimer’s Critique of instrumental reason. New York:  Seabury Press (1974), and Hans Magnus Enzensberger’s. 1970. Baukasten zu einer Theorie der  Medien. Kursbuch 20(1970): 159-186, which greatly influenced him. See Kulla, Der  Phrasenprьfer, 20.
9 die tageszeitung (September 1, 1981), 2.
10 Kulla, Der Phrasenprьfer, 26.
8 Heroes Yet Criminals of the German Computer Revolution
                                     *171*
account provides an insight into Holland’s political philosophy: in a technically evolving  world, one must fight order through chaos and humor. Thus, Holland’s political agenda  occupied a space between computer technology’s democratization and popularization and its  somewhat anarchistic appropriation. Indeed, his agenda has many features similar to the  entanglements of home computing technology and countercultures in other European countries  during the 1980s.11 Finding himself in an instrumental-rational world, Holland tried to  mobilize chaos and humor as well as ethics to fight it. After studying electrical  engineering, computer science, and political science, he began working in leftist bookstores  and at an alternative software company.12 Both Ammann and Kulla suggest that Holland had a  “typical” but hard-line post-1968 mindset and thus held anti-capitalist, anti-statist, and  somewhat anti-American opinions.13 However, it was not easy for him to find a place in the  leftist political spectrum. While communists agreed to technocratic Soviet projects, he felt  1980s environmentalists fought technology with garlic, the cross, and holy water.14 Most  countercultural movements in Germany at that time adopted a technology-skeptic attitude  expressed by the highly influential Frankfurt School and were reluctant to embrace  technophiles. Holland had no natural audience on the left but had to create one himself.15 In  the early 1980s, a few computer clubs existed in Germany, but the charismatic Holland decided  to establish his own group in line with his critical enthusiasm for computer technology. He  invited others to meet at Schwarzmarkt—an alternative bookstore in Hamburg. The group meeting  at Schwarzmarkt developed into a regulars’ table, where Holland and Wernery met for the first  time in November 1983. As Holland had set up the meeting just by announcing it in taz, he  also founded the Club simply by announcing the organization at the end of 1982. However, the  Club remained a more or less inactive gathering of like-minded computer enthusiasts.16
Holland’s next project was Datenschleuder. After a rather unsuccessful attempt at starting a  hackers’ journal on floppy disks in Berlin in 1981, he announced the establishment of  Datenschleuder in taz in 1984, receiving 100 advance orders for a journal that did not yet  even exist.17 Since he had announced it, he then had to
11 For example, Bruno JakiC analyzes the entanglements of home computing with New Wave music  in Yugoslavia. Bruno Jakic. 2014. Galaxy and the new wave: Yugoslav computer culture in  1980s. In Hacking Europe. From computer cultures to demoscenes, ed. Gerard Alberts and Ruth  Oldenziel, 107-128. New York: Springer.
12 Kulla, Der PhrasenprUfer, 16.
13 See, Ibid., 37 and Ammann, Nach uns die Zukunft, 24. Kulla speaks of counter control and  inverse panopticism (p. 29) that formed a crucial part of the Club’s agenda. Ammann gives  another example: after Chernobyl, the Club discussed building its own surveillance system for  radioactivity. With home computers, everyone could measure and analyze local radioactivity  and would not have to rely on public information services.
14 Kulla, Der PhrasenprUfer, 20. As I will discuss below, the Green party turned out to be a  prototype of these concerns.
15 Ibid., 16.
16 Ibid., 22.
17The number of 100 advance orders is mentioned in the first Datenschleuder. Kulla, however,  mentions 800. Ibid., 26.
                                     *172*
K. Denker
deliver. He made the first Datenschleuder rather hastily. It consisted of a two-sided DIN A4  sheet, the close type giving the impression of the chaos Holland had imagined. The hackers’  new organ sought to provide information about new hacks, security vulnerabilities, technical  specifications for the broadband communications networks Btx and Datex-P network, and  government protocols for shutting down telecommunication in case of war or emergencies.18
Furthermore, Holland published an ironic acceptance test for aspiring members: to become a  member of the Club, you had to program a quine.19 This is hacking culture at its best—a quine  is a rather useless program, not thought of by the designers of a particular programming  language. Its possibility is an unintentional effect in programming languages. Thus, the  challenge combines two aspects of hackerism— playing with computer technology as an end in  itself and judging others by their technical skills.20 While we find an ironic elitism in the  acceptance test, Holland invited everyone to copy and redistribute Datenschleuder. It soon  became his printed bullhorn and a popular organ for hackers in Germany.
8.2	The Conscience of Hackers
Holland had a technophile mindset, yet also shared the left-wing sentiment that criticized  new technology. We have to examine the first issues of Datenschleuder in order to understand  Holland’s motivation and see how his leftist ideas had created a small, chaotic computer  club.
In addition to the challenge for joining the Club, the first issue informed readers about the  Club’s principles and projects for the near future. The publication also contained an  overview of the hardware for hacking (modems, Btx decoders, and microcomputers), some ironic  remarks about DBP, and finally a hackers’ hymn written by Cheshire Catalyst, editor of  American TAP Magazine. Holland wanted a “galactic association without any fixed structure”  that fought for new rights.
We realize — as far as possible — the ‘new’ human right of at least world-wide free,  unrestricted, and uncontrollable information exchange (freedom to the data) between every  human being and other intelligent creatures without exception.21
18 Datenschleuder 1 (1984).
19A quine is a program whose output equals its own program code. This means the program  refers to itself in a way that it keeps reproducing itself. Kleene’s recursion theorem, part  of the theoretical foundation of programming, proves the existence of quines in every  sufficiently strong programming language, but it can be tricky to program them. It is not  possible to simply include the human readable programming language and print it on screen.  You have to “calculate” the code by playing with the text processing features of the  programming language.
20As Patryk Wasiak shows in his analysis of the Polish demoscene, judging each other on  technical skills is a common phenomenon in hacker (and cracker) groups. Patryk Wasiak,  Playing and copying: Social practices of home computer users in Poland during the 1980s, in  Alberts and Oldenziel, Hacking Europe, 129-150.
21 Datenschleuder 1 (1984).
8 Heroes Yet Criminals of the German Computer Revolution
                                     *173*
Being a self-declared vanguard, the Club intended to enlighten readers about the new era’s  dangers and opportunities. These rather abstract ideas included an agenda to design and  publish a construction guide for a universal but cheap modem. Furthermore, the agenda  included the announcement to set up publicly accessible Computer Bulletin Board Systems  (BBS), obtained and published information about the telephone system, and finally provided  tips for dealing with “the brave new world in the year of big brotherhood.”22 This was a  blatant reference to Orwell’s novel, which had had an enormous influence on Holland and the  hacker movement. Emerging, increasingly centralized, and opaque information technologies  could serve as the surveillance infrastructure needed by big and not-so-big brothers. In the  journal’s third issue, BBS were discussed, with a clear warning that the government listened  to, read, and collected any data it could get.23 The agenda related to many post-1968 ideas:  the struggle against centralized and opaque systems—technological as well as political.
After the second issue of Datenschleuder discussed German BBS in April 1984, the authors  continued to reveal passwords, tuned into electronic mail systems like TELEBOX and systems  like Btx, and mocked advice to choose sufficiently strong passwords as well as totally  inexperienced readers who incessantly posed greenhorn questions.24 They explained commonly  used abbreviations, again with a grain of salt. Furthermore, their Chaos Team kept  criticizing DBP, public authorities, and computer firms for their lax security handling, data  privacy violations, and neglect of consumer protection.25 In the fifth and sixth double  issue, the authors defined hacking as actions in the tradition of Greenpeace and Robin Hood,  “Robin Data.”26
In short, Holland did not find “hacktivists” when he came to Hamburg in the early 1980s. In  an atmosphere open to technology and simultaneously anxious about opaque, centralized  systems, he managed to realize his ideas by creating a Club of politically aware techno- nerds, the Chaos Computer Club. The Club, still quite small when the first Datenschleuder was  published, already considered itself a vanguard, not of hackerism but of a politically vague,  yet lively and eager hacktivism.
22 Ibid.
23 Datenschleuder 3 (1984), 1.
24 Datenschleuder 4 (1984), 1.
25 Datenschleuder 3 (1984), 2.
26 Datenschleuder 5 + 6 (1984) 1 and Ammann, Nach uns die Zukunft, 20.
                                     *174*
K. Denker
8.3	Going Public and Acting Up
Discussing the implications and challenges of the new era automatically stressed the need to  go public. Club members did not just organize their own gatherings but visited mainstream  conferences on data security and protection.27 In November 1984, Holland lectured at the  eighth data protection conference DAFTA. Here, he presented a way to open Btx decoder boxes  without breaking the seal, along with other security flaws. His presentation, cited in a  television report on the conference, impressed a data protection commissioner so much that he  concluded “whoever uses Btx in the years to come, should be punished for stupidity.”28  Holland explained his own agenda to telecasters as “protecting not the data, but the people  from the data.”
The Club members were also keen to establish contact with political parties. In 1986, they  were asked to give their expert opinion on the introduction of computer technology in the  Green party’s Bundestag offices. Having once again encountered assessments of computers as a  mere instrument of power and economizing there, they tried to appease the skeptics by  emphasizing attempts to find a low-threshold “alternative” way of appropriating computers in  the Green parliamentary group. In the end, the Greens rejected the suggestions. Instead, they  stuck to their old policy, becoming the only party to refuse to participate in a test run of  a database system for parliamentary protocols and prints a few years later.29
The episode sheds light on the Club’s failure to win over the left and the alternative  movement to their ideas. Members remained aloof from leftist discourses on efficiency,  employment rights, environmental protection, peace, and fighting authority and power. At the  same time, leftist groups were disenchanted. In 1985, a group named “Black & White against  the Computer State” questioned polemically where the promised chaos was.30 They believed that  instead of fighting the Orwellian Big Brother state, the hackers had turned out to be  techno-maniacs who had more in common with data protection commissioners than with leftist  computer critics. The hackers were the “truffle pigs of the electronics industry.”31
Nevertheless, the Club’s agenda attracted other computer enthusiasts who were open to  politics and also had quite an impact on data protection circles. This was still an internal,  self-referential discourse without resonance in the leftist movement. The same is true for  the political mainstream: although Holland and Wernery
27 The literature often fails to substantially address the importance of conferences for such  groups. However, Gabriella Coleman shows that face-to-face interactions form crucial part of  hacktivism. Gabriella Coleman. 2010. The hacker conference. Anthropological Quarterly 83(1,  Winter): 47-72.
28Ammann, Nach uns die Zukunft, 18. The video recording can be found at  http://chaosradio.ccc.de/ doc001.html. Accessed 21 Apr 2011.
29Ammann, Nach uns die Zukunft, 25; Kulla, Der Phrasenprьfer, 40.
30 The original German name of the group is Schwarz & WeiЯ gegen den Computerstaat. “Wo  bleibt das Chaos?” die tageszeitung (February 22, 1985).
31Ammann, Nach uns die Zukunft, 23f.
8 Heroes Yet Criminals of the German Computer Revolution
                                     *175*
as the Club’s de facto spokespersons managed to appear on prime-time news broadcasts, they  were little noticed and mostly as esoteric and exotic nerds. Hackers received media attention  for tapping and hacking but not for their political agenda.32 Thus, Holland and Wernery had  to hnd an opportunity to arouse public interest for a topic in which they could present  themselves as experts. In 1984, an opportunity to hack Btx arose when Holland and Wernery  obtained HASPA identification codes.
8.4	Hacking Germany’s Bildschirmtext
To understand the impact of the Btx hack on hackerism and computer crime legislation, we must  appreciate Btx’s relevance in the early 1980s. While its market penetration had failed to  meet expectations by far, the media and politicians presented the system as an icon of modern  telecommunications and the dawn of the information society. As a centralized public service  system, for hackers it was the epitome of large, centralized, and opaque information  technology. In Btx, antagonisms of information technology were seen that corresponded to the  antagonisms in the political sphere: on the one hand, one could meet technocratic-minded  politicians advocating business applications and an alternative, technology-skeptic  counterculture on the other. While the public may have been reluctant to adopt Btx in those  years, techno-enthusiasts were not.
Unlike today’s Internet, Btx distinguished subscribers and content providers. While  subscribers’ terminal devices were only able to download and render pages, providers had  terminal devices with editing functionality. Btx pages were stored in database servers, while  companies intending to provide dynamically generated content, e.g., for banking applications,  could connect their own infrastructure to Btx via broadband technology. In comparison,  subscriber devices were rather simple. They could download and render pages and offered  functions for using Btx’s micropayment system. The Club appropriated the feature by  publishing a donation page billing DM 9.99 per visit. Members found it was tempting to access  the page on publicly accessible Btx terminals found in stores and post offices to advertise  and demonstrate the new system. By experimenting, Club members discovered that subscriber and  most provider devices were actually the same hardware, while the latter had two additional  buttons for editing. They figured out how to turn a much cheaper subscriber device into a  provider device by drilling two holes in the case and installing the missing buttons.33
Btx was introduced in an atmosphere of leftist skepticism about large, anonymous, and opaque  technical systems that were already in the public’s mind such as
32 Ibid., 20.
33 Chaos Radio Express no. 161, network podcast produced by Tim Pritlove, available at  http:// chaosradio.ccc.de/cre161.html. Accessed 30 Apr 2011.
                                     *176*
K. Denker
the antinuclear movement’s run against risky technology and the resistance to the 1981  population census that finally led to the novel basic right of informational self- determination. While these circumstances alienated large groups of potential buyers, they  were tempting for hackers, who saw themselves as vanguards of the new information society.  Since Btx was controlled by DBP, which hackers considered their secret enemy, the Club tried  to draw public attention to flaws in Btx. At the time, Club members used to trigger  skirmishes with DBP because it had government monopoly on telecommunication, controlled  access to the telephone system, and authorized the hardware that was allowed to be connected  to the telephone jack. DBP determined telephone charges and could constrain services. For  example, it used to be illegal to connect a modem that had not been approved by the DBP’s  engineering office. Since only a few very expensive modems had been accredited in the early  1980s, many users who tried to save money with imported hardware found themselves being  investigated. They were accused of installing and maintaining a disallowed telecommunication  device.34 However, this was no deterrent for a real hacker: a do-it-yourself guide for a  cheap modem was published in Hackerbibel.35 The “Datenklo” modem was designed as an acoustic  coupler, not connected to telephone jacks but to telephone receivers.36 Even such an  unaccredited acoustic coupler without an electric connection to the telephone jack was  illegal.
8.5	Revealing the Gaps in Btx
Let us turn back to the Club’s activities. After members obtained HASPA identification codes,  they managed to access the Club’s donation page and charge the bank. For every access, the  Btx system charged the bank DM 9.99 and credited the Club. On November 18, 1984, after 13,500  automatically performed accesses, the Btx system entered about DM 135,000 on the Club’s  credit side. The following Monday, Holland and Wernery pressed charges against themselves  with Hamburg’s data privacy commissioner and reported their act at a media conference.37  Wernery explained that they had learned about the bank’s codes by exploiting the entire  memory of a Btx page. They triggered the remote system’s software to reveal its memory  contents randomly as clutter on screen where identity codes could be found.
Legally, it was only a misdemeanor. Hence, the bank decided not to sue Wernery and Holland  but lauded them for revealing a risky security vulnerability in the Btx system. The bank  manager blamed DBP instead for falsely assuring Btx’s security. Now, DBP was forced to  recognize there had been a glitch in the system that could
34 Gesetz ьber Fernmeldeanlagen (Telecommunication Devices Act) of 1892, revised in 1977 and  1986, defined this punishable act as an infringement.
35 Holland, Die Hackerbibel, 95. The name “Datenklo” is explained on p. 98.
36The components for this connection originated from a plumbing sleeve which gave the modem  its name: “klo” is a German colloquial term for toilet.
37Ammann, Nach uns die Zukunft, 18.
8 Heroes Yet Criminals of the German Computer Revolution
                                     *177*
be triggered by exploiting the pages memory. Its officials denied, however, that such a  glitch could be used to acquire bank codes. While the hackers’ testimony stood against the  DBP’s claim at the time, it was and still is hard to decide whether the hack was actually  feasible in theory and practice.
However, since the Club indisputably had knowledge of the identification codes, embarrassed  DBP was at a loss to explain the incident. While initially recognizing the glitch, DBP  finally blamed HASPA of leaking their codes to the hackers. In a mailing to its employees, it  accused the bank of carelessness regarding their own data. The letter was reprinted in  Hackerbibel, ridiculing DBP.38
Soon, the Committee on Posts and Telecommunications in the Bundestag reviewed Btx security.  On December 5, 1984, the committee discussed the implications of the hack as the last item on  its agenda. The chairman demanded a briefing on Btx’s data privacy due to an “incident in  Hamburg whereby HASPA identification codes were revealed to a computer club.”39 In his  response, a DBP official explained that no one knew for sure how the computer club had  acquired the identification codes. Surely, these codes had not been discovered through  software glitches in the Btx system, he argued. Investigations showed that the bank had been  careless by entering the codes during a demonstration in public, where the codes had been  tapped. DBP rejected virtually every one of the hackers’ claims: the connection device for  Btx could neither be opened without anyone noticing—as a matter of fact, Holland had  demonstrated this in front of cameras earlier that year—nor were the identification codes and  password saved in the same place. Although DBP admitted a software glitch had existed, its  officials denied the possibility of abusing it. Finally, the committee agreed that DBP had  reported this incident clumsily to the public, since it had acknowledged a bug without  insisting on its innocuousness, hence causing a major drawback to the proliferation of Btx.40
However, DBP did not actually deny the possibility of entering foreign identification codes  to access pages automatically and transfer money from one Btx account to another. Even if  Wernery and Holland had obtained identification codes in another way, they managed to  transfer the money. A transfer of such a large amount could not be concealed. A real,  malevolent attacker could have succeeded in tapping a larger number of identification codes  to debit many accounts with small amounts. This would have been a mere misdemeanor and  arguably a large number of small amounts could have remained unnoticed. It is obvious that  Wernery and Holland intentionally planned their coup in such a way that they could easily  deny bad faith
38 “Btx ist sicher! Computer-Club profitiert vom Leichtsinn einer Sparkasse,” (“Btx is  secure! Computer-Club benefits from a bank’s recklessness”) BPM-Information fьr alle  Beschдftigten der DBP (December 12, 1984), reprinted in Holland, Die Hackerbibel, 43.
39The German protocol reads “AnlaЯ dafьr sei der kьrzlich bekannt gewordene Vorfall in  Hamburg, wo die Kennung der Hamburger Sparkasse einem Computer-Club bekannt wurde,”  Parliamentary Archives (PA-DBT 3115 A 10/15), Prot. 17, 10. Protocols of this Archive are  subsequently referred with session and page number.
40 Ibid., 13.
                                     *178*
K. Denker
as well as attract public interest. Likewise, DBP’s clumsy behavior played into their hands.  Officials were just too eager to defend themselves.
Holland and Wemery’s calculation paid off: many newspapers and magazines, from the right-wing  populist tabloid Bild and the conservative Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung to left-wing  newspapers like taz, reported on serious data protection issues within Btx. While taz  published an article written by Holland, the centrist newspaper Die Zeit, for instance,  compared the hackers to the German allotment movement, whose members had tried to escape from  a “dominance of machines.”41 In Die Zeit, Thomas von Randow was frank in his view:
It is a wonder that the Btx hackers’ little games have been harmless so far. After all, they  exposed the plaintiveness of the Bildschirmtext design with a clarity that leaves nothing to  the imagination. [...] All this should have been a warning for Bundespost, before its  favorite child Bildschirmtext got a slap in the face through the bank trick early last week.  [...]
A program that needs so much reworking is f.ed up beyond all repair.42
The magazine Der Spiegel listed more of the flaws that the hackers had found in Btx.43 Even  the tabloid Bild cheered for the computer enthusiasts, while usually reporting from a law- and-order point of view on computer crimes.44 The hack raised interest within other hacker  groups45 and in two of Germany’s public service television news.46 Newspaper articles and  television reports depicted Holland’s and Wernery’s hack as a contribution to data privacy  activism. The hack had obviously touched a common conception of new information technology  among journalists and presumably with the public at large: while the new possibilities were  fascinating, as reports from technology trade shows illustrated, the vision of large systems  controlled by a few organizations—at that time the state in the case of DBP—was unsettling.  Although it may not have been a common critique as information technology was still a niche  topic, the media coverage expressed general discomfort with information technology during the  1980s.
41 Bildschirmtext im Schwachstellentest. die tageszeitung, December 22, 1984; Thomas von  Randow. 1984. Ein Schlag gegen das System. Ein Computerclub deckt Sicherheitslьcken im Btx- Programm der Post auf. Die Zeit 49, November 30.
42 Ibid. My translation.
43 Lustige Spielchen. Der Spiegel 48(1984), 241.
44 Bild (November 20, 1984).
45As Nevejan and Badenoch show, the hack was widely discussed in hacker groups outside  Germany as well. Holland and Wernery were invited to speak at a hacker gathering in  Amsterdam. Caroline Nevejan, and Alexander Badenoch. 2014. How Amsterdam invented the  Internet: European networks of significance, 1980-1995. In Hacking Europe. From computer  cultures to demoscenes, ed. Gerard Alberts and Ruth Oldenziel, 189-217. New York: Springer.  Even today, the Btx hack forms a crucial part of the Club’s self-representation.
46A video recording of the heute journal reporting on the hack can be found at  http://chaosradio. ccc.de/doc002.html in German. Accessed 27 Apr 2011.
8 Heroes Yet Criminals of the German Computer Revolution
                                     *179*
8.6	Consumer Protection vs. Hacker Ethics
While Club members loved experimenting with hardware to explore its capabilities, DBP aimed  to design ready-made end-user devices by anticipating some sort of ordinary user behavior.47  Its officials considered young computer enthusiasts’ experiments “untypical behavior.” Here,  DBP’s approach and the Club’s identity were in conflict: Holland sought to enable people to  manage their data independently, to fight “the big brotherhood” and become citizens of the  new era. DBP, in contrast, had designed, planned, and controlled their system with a more or  less passive role in mind for consumers at the end of the economic chain.
The Club’s point of view corresponded with the hacker ethics coined by Steven Levy in his  influential book Hackers. Heroes of the Computer Revolution. He described a “hands-on”  philosophy, in which all information and every piece of hardware should be accessible to  everyone:
The best way to promote this free exchange of information is to have an open system,  something which presents no boundaries between a hacker and a piece of information or an item  of equipment that he needs in his quest for knowledge, improvement, and time on-line.
The last thing you need is a bureaucracy. Bureaucracies, whether corporate, government, or  university, are flawed systems, dangerous in that they cannot accommodate the exploratory  impulse of true hackers. Bureaucrats hide behind arbitrary rules (as opposed to the logical  algorithms by which machines and computer programs operate): they invoke those rules to  consolidate power, and perceive the constructive impulse of hackers as a threat.48
In contrast, hackers should mistrust authorities and promote decentralization. And hackers  should judge each other “by their hacking, not bogus criteria such as degrees, age, race, or  position.”49 The central doctrine of hacker ethics is to gain access to a system itself and  not to settle for using ready-made end-user interfaces. Most likely Wernery and Holland were  not aware of Levy’s book at the time of the hack but explicitly agreed later on.
For sure, Wernery’s and Holland’s motivation was not as consumer protective as they pretended  in Datenschleuder and in interviews. They felt it had also been a great opportunity to have  their nemesis DBP meet its Waterloo. It matched the image of hackers as a technically  enthusiastic, yet critical vanguard, demanding free access. This ambivalence of two impulses —a rage against the machine and a passion for some kind of utopia, in which not the  contingent, anonymous institutions but the logical and rational algorithms would lead the way  to democratic computer technology and a free information society—turned into a half-hearted  demand for consumer protection, not the political agenda some leftist groups desired.  However, it was this sugar-coated concept of hackers that had a significant impact on  discourses criminalizing their activities.
47 This behavior was investigated by group discussions which formed the main subject of  secondary research literature at the time. A history of Btx technology comparing its design  and appropriation is, in contrast, still to be written.
48 Levy, Hackers, 41.
49 Ibid., 43.
                                     *180*
K. Denker
8.7	Legislation for White-Collar Crimes
In the combined issues 5 + 6 of Datenschleuder in 1984, the authors complained about a subtle  criminalization of their hobby. For instance, they pointed out that a telecommunication  journal had published a do-it-yourself guide for building an “illegal” modem a few years  earlier, while the authors of that very journal accused the hackers of the same now.50 They  added: “Only those who are totally crackbrained would publish a journal like Datenschleuder  and commit offenses at the same time.” Nevertheless, discourses seeking to penalize hacking  had already started, while consumer protection activism was also leaving its mark.
Before the 1980s, computer crimes were unknown to the German public. Companies had suffered  from practices they considered to be crimes against their computer infrastructure. In most  cases, they could only get compensation but not the satisfaction of having those acts  prosecuted. At hearings and conferences outside the public domain, experts discussed ways to  penalize what they considered computer crimes. The first hearing on computer crimes in  Germany was held on May 13, 1974, while an influential monograph analyzing computer crimes  was published in 1977.51 In many studies and monographs of the 1970s, computer abuses were  discussed, while in the 1980s, experts lamented the lack of legislation and rulings that  resulted in courts finding defendants not guilty.
Computer crimes whether penalized or not were usually considered by the media as well as  politicians to be white-collar crimes, committed by experts or business employees, not by  petty criminals or young vandals. Although hackers and young computer enthusiasts were  mistrusted, they were usually only looked down on or ignored. In 1983, the Bundestag  Committee on Legal Affairs began to debate a draft bill to fight “white-collar crimes.” The  legislative process was restarted after being interrupted by early elections.52 In the  Ministry’s draft law of 1978, the former Social Democrat and Liberal government had suggested  penalizing computer fraud through a law against white-collar crimes. While the draft had  indeed stated that the new technology offered ways to prevent crimes, for example, through  safer computer systems, at the same time new crimes evolved that did not fit under the  existing Strafgesetzbuch (StGB, Criminal Code).53 The newly elected conservative government  agreed and restarted negotiations addressing frauds in tender procedures
50 Datenschleuder 5 + 6 (1984), 1.
51 Ulrich Sieber. 1977. Computerkriminalitдt und Strafrecht. Kцln: Heymann.
52 Hans Achenbach. 1986. Das Zweite Gesetz zur Bekдmpfung der Wirtschaftskriminalitдt. Neue  Juristische Wochenschrift 30: 1835-1898. While the new coalition of conservatives and  liberals coincided with changes in other European countries, one has to bear in mind that the  former coalition was indeed fought by leftist movements. Especially after NATO’s Double-Track  Decision, the German peace movement alienated the government while the Green party was  evolving as a collective movement out of many left-wing groups. Hence, while the change of  government indeed meant a shift in economic policy, in Germany anyway it had little impact on  the extra-parliamentary movement of the left.
53 Ministry draft law for an anti-white-collar crime act of December 19, 1978, 41.
8 Heroes Yet Criminals of the German Computer Revolution
                                     *181*
and computer crimes in one draft.54 Since the part on computer crimes was undisputed, the  introduction of computer crime statutory law seemed to be a more or less obvious development  of the StGB. Aspects of an emerging computer culture, especially hackers, were seen as  marginal, if seen at all. The explanation in the draft statute filed by the  Bundesjustizministerium (BMJ, Federal Ministry of Justice) only spoke of criminal attacks as  an American phenomenon:
Due to the widespread use of computers by commercial and administrative entities in the past  two decades, criminal attacks on computers - which first occurred in the U.S.A. but are  increasingly being detected in the Federal Republic of Germany and other Western  industrialized nations as well - pose a major threat. The draft statute proposes a new corpus  delicti for computer fraud and a corpus delicti for falsification of recorded data as well as  several amendments to statutes concerning the protection of deeds.55
The bill contained one paragraph penalizing computer fraud and another penalizing the  counterfeiting of electronic deeds. The existing law against fraud was deemed inapplicable  since it was considered impossible for computers to err.56 The government suggested  introducing §263a StGB which defined computer fraud. Under this new provision, a person was  acting illegally if he or she entered wrong information, manipulated the work flow of a  computer program, or changed or blocked accurate data from being processed. Furthermore, the  law was restricted to cases in which the victim suffered financial loss.
A hearing on the draft was held on June 6, 1984. The invited experts supported the urgent  need for new legislation: offenders in cases like computer sabotage or time theft were not  just motivated by pleasure and profit but by political reasons as well. This is the first  time the term “hacker” was mentioned in the debate. According to the expert Sieber, hackers  just like computer crimes were an American phenomenon that had just started to spread to  Germany.57
Other types of offenses should be recognized by the committee, Sieber continued: for  instance, manipulation of a running program, hiding malicious code in programs, blocking  calculations such as wage accounting, program theft, time theft, counterfeiting  identification codes, and finally destroying hardware or data.58 Because in time theft no  private data is obtained, changed, or destroyed and no running programs are affected in their  internal logic, the intended legislation did not cover them. Nevertheless, a “thief’  benefited from foreign processing capabilities without causing a measurable loss. Written  testimonies from stakeholders in the business community and German government stressed this  point.
54 Bundestagssitzungs-Protokoll (German Federal Parliament Protocol) 10/25 (September 29,  1983): 1665.
55 Ibid., 1668. In the German legal system, the term “deeds” (“Urkunden”) includes documents  that can serve as evidence in court.
56 Fritjof Haft. 1987. Das Zweite Gesetze zur Bekдmpfung der Wirtschaftskriminalitдt (2.  WiKG). Neue Zeitschrift fьr Strafrecht 1: 6-9.
57 Protocol of the Committee for Legal Affairs, Parliamentary Archives (PA-DBT 3109 A 10/6),  Prot. 26, 173.
58 Ibid., 26, 174-184.
                                     *182*
K. Denker
For instance, Nixdorf, the biggest computer firm in Germany at that time, demanded the  penalization of underlying offenses such as unauthorized access which is needed to commit  other offenses like time theft.59 Unauthorized access without any manipulation of programs or  data was already penalized under the Bundesdatenschutzgesetz (BDSG, Federal Data Protection  Act), but only if personal data were involved. According to Nixdorf, unauthorized access was  not just a legal policy issue. It was an issue of system integrity, since an offender could  damage systems through negligence, causing high costs to regain system integrity. It turned  out the bill was insufficient in meeting industry demand for penalizing computer crimes,  while academics disputed its legal concept.60 Committee members had previously agreed on the  computer crime part of the draft but had to acknowledge the need to revise it.61
On September 26, 1984, Berlin’s Commissioner for Data Protection filed a copy of the  “Counterfeit Access Device and Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1984,” adopted by the US  Senate in the summer of 1984. In this bill, the Senate penalized fraud by counterfeit access  devices like counterfeit or stolen credit cards, furthermore, unauthorized access to computer  systems and using computer systems with authorized access. The latter regulation constrained  the penalty to cases in which “anything of value (other than the use of the computer)  aggregating $5,000 or more during any one year period” is obtained.62 Thus, “time theft,” the  mere use of a foreign computer, was not to be punished.63
In the Senate report accompanying the draft, experts emphasized the need to penalize  “hacking,” which was nothing but “intellectual pranksterism.”64 As a consequence, the Senate  Committee complained of a too indulgent attitude towards hackers. Their image contradicted  that of computer revolution heroes or consumer protection advocates and was more in keeping  with rascals playing intellectual, still boyish pranks. Here, the term “hacker” had been  introduced by experts to denote pranksterism, while in Germany the experts had addressed  hacking as an underestimated crime. In both ways, criminalization was at work: one either  already agreed on the felonious character of hacking or one was still ignoring it as a  supposedly harmless intellectual hobby that cost “the economy millions now and potentially  billions in the future,” according to the report.
About a year after the hearing, the BMJ announced it would extend the scope of the  committee’s draft legislation.65 The BMJ explained this extension was motivated
59 Nixdorf’s statement for the public hearing concerning the 2. WiKG (June 4, 1984), 7.
60 For example, Fritjof Haft of the University Tьbingen cautioned when changing existing laws  and even rejected the necessity to change anything at all. See: Committee Protocol - Prot.  26, 169. Haft, Das Zweite Gesetz zur Bekдmpfung der Wirtschaftskriminalitдt (2. WiKG), 6.
61 Ibid., 26, 195.
62 H.R. 5616. Counterfeit Access Device and Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1984. In 98th  Congress, 2nd Session, 5f.
63 Report to accompany H.R. 5616, 20.
64 Ibid., 11.
65 Letter from the BMJ to the Committee, June 11, 1985.
8 Heroes Yet Criminals of the German Computer Revolution
                                     *183*
not only by the hearing but also by a visit of German parliamentarians to the USA and the  results of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) working group  for Information, Computer and Communication Policy (ICCP). In the extended draft, the  Ministry suggested introducing laws against spying out data and changing or deleting it  without authorization. Just as requested by Nixdorf, the draft planned to penalize  unauthorized access, with imprisonment of up to 1 year. The draft’s explanatory statement  included:
A person fulfills the elements of the offense if he or she overcomes access guards, for  example by repeatedly typing combinations of letters and numbers on the keyboard of a home  computer (“hacking”) and, as such, gains access to data not designated to be accessed by this  person. Criminalizing such cases is justified by the legal wrong-doing in jeopardizing  operator and user integrity caused by a successful unauthorized access of databases, by the  possibility of causing too high system load, as well as by the creation of opportunities to  engage in other computer-related offenses.66
The Ministry presented an explanation of “hacking,” defining hackers as offenders who merely  try passwords again and again till they gain access. Significantly, its definition ignored  any form of technological skills described previously as intellectual pranksterism. Many  articles in Datenschleuder dealt with technical problems by describing the functionality of  phone networks or mainframe operating systems, showing hackers had at least some technical  knowledge. Instead, the draft’s opinion matched seamlessly that of DBP in the Committee on  Posts and Telecommunications, denying hackers had any technical expertise or discovered any  flaws in Btx at all. Nevertheless, this opinion dissented with the US Senate’s report, which  called hacking an “intellectual pranksterism.” It is plausible that hackers were despised  since they were not experts in a traditional sense. Most acts ascribed to hackers in the USA  were committed by those operating within universities. While university students give the  impression of future experts, the young Club members do not. Expertise is ascribed to  professionals, not to hobbyists, whether or not the latter have a profound knowledge.  Likewise, the statement completely ignored any notion of consumer protection, not to mention  any political agenda. In contrast, it emphasized the notion of a punishable crime for mere  unauthorized access.
On October 23,1985, the Committee on Legal Affairs agreed to the BMJ’s latest suggestions,  while the Greens preferred to fight safety problems with technical measures instead of new  criminal laws. Except for this point, the need for the bill was undisputed.67 Still, some  committee members considered exempting “good hackers” and “young computer enthusiasts” from  punishment for their “beneficial work.” They were impressed by hacks in which “hobbyists”  proved large companies and organizations’ security measures to be insufficient. The committee  also mentioned a case in which two members of a computer club managed to transfer a large  amount of money from a bank to their own account using Btx, thus proving that DBP’s security  guarantee was false. Even the conservatives agreed: they
66Attachment to the Letter from the BMJ to the Committee, June 11, 1985.
67 Committee Protocol, Prot. 63, 38.
                                     *184*
K. Denker
sympathized with hackers and were impressed by their “intellectual discipline.” Nevertheless,  it was necessary to limit their “hobby” to a “justifiable extent.” The draft of §202a StGB  was seen as an inevitable part of the new legislation. Nonetheless, the committee agreed to  exempt hacking that revealed data protection issues from punishment.68 Trying to avoid a  legal definition of what “politically correct hacking” meant, the committee reshaped §202a in  such a way that obtaining data without authorization was penalized, while unauthorized  connecting to computer systems without causing loss or damage and without obtaining secret  data was not. Only the Greens doubted if the wording was sufficient to exempt “good hackers”  from punishment.69
We can see an interesting shift in this debate: while earlier hackers were seen as activists  engaging in data and consumer protection against nontransparent technology, they were now  discussed as young enthusiasts with an exciting hobby that nevertheless required strict  boundaries to maintain acceptable social behavior. The implications of the shift in hacking’s  image are obvious. Shifting names for phenomena is a basic strategy in shaping political  discourses where the actual context or meaning of the particular phenomenon is irrelevant.  What does matter is the implication of a logic of representation in which hackers are either  subsumed under the concepts of consumer protection or hobbyism, superficially distinguished  from “intellectual pranksterism.” Through this discursive shift, the committee adapted the  image of hacking in the Senate’s report step by step.
The Btx hack did have an impact on the legislative process. The intervention played a role in  the debate on the role of hackers. However, this image of hacking as a kind of consumer  protection has been superimposed by treating it as a mere hobby. Hacking shifted from a  political to a personal affair and was thus marginalized in the political discourse: its  alleged connection to public interests could now be ignored. Still, the sympathy towards  hackers did not vanish completely but enabled exemption from punishment, not for political  activists but for young enthusiasts whose hobby interfered with serious matters of state and  the economy.
8.8	The Legal Implications for Hacktivism
From the hackers’ point of view, the Greens’ critique turned out to be correct. While hacking  into a foreign computer system was now penalized only if foreign data were obtained, hackers  thought it was impossible to hack into any system without obtaining any data.70 While even  hackers admitted the need for computer crime
68 Ibid., 63, 47.
69 Ibid., 71, 6.
70 Stephan Ackermann. 1988. Die aktuellen Tarife fьrs Hacken. In Das Chaos Computer Buch.  Hacking made in Germany, ed. Wieckmann, 183-192. Reinbek bei Hamburg: Wunderlich, here 185,  considers even passwords to be protected data. This interpretation is, however, to be argued  from a juridical point of view, Gьnter Freiherr von Gravenreuth. 1989. Computerviren, hacker,
8 Heroes Yet Criminals of the German Computer Revolution
                                     *185*
legislation to protect citizens and the economy from computer fraud, they considered the law  as an “anti-hacker law” that included a “tariff list for hacking.”71 Other hackers were even  more pessimistic. One lamented that the new statutes penalized hacking without exception for  “honest hackers” who were doing nothing wrong.72 However, most hackers also admitted the need  for the new statutes: not to contest “juvenile hackers” but the “gigantic dimensions” of  computer crimes. Nevertheless, without a doubt, the lawmaker had indeed intended to fight  hackerism through an “Anti-hacker Act,” as the media put it.73 So, even if ambiguities in the  law might have allowed hacking, it had certainly become more risky. Especially since using  foreign identification codes had become computer fraud, a new Btx hack would have been  illegal and consequently, its impact in the media impossible. While they could still look for  ways to hack within the law, hackers had without doubt become the criminals of the computer  revolution.74 The Club drew a surprising conclusion from the shift: what had started as a  “chaotic” regulars’ table became a legally registered association in 1986. Protected by the  basic right of freedom of association, the Club attempted to avoid further criminalization as  a terrorist or criminal organi-zation.75 While authors in legal journals tried to maintain  the impunity of hobbyist hacking, their attempts to tell “hackers” from “crashers” soon  became silent.76
8.9	Conclusion
The ambivalent image of hackers as heroes and criminals that I examined in legal discourses  also found their way into the media, into politics, and even with hackers themselves. The  ambivalence in the various debates shaped hacktivism in Western Germany in the 1980s. Both  the legal discourses and hackers’ self-concept had strong roots in American images, yet  appropriated in specific ways. Hacktivism in Germany together with post-1968 discourses led  to a political hacktivism, inspiring actions that impressed journalists and politicians  alike. Encouraged by the openmindedness of the public and politicians for data protection  activism, the hackers began contesting their criminalization and marginalization. In their  opinion,
datenspione, crasher und cracker. Ьberblick und rechtliche Einordnung. Neue Zeitschrift fьr  Strafrecht, 201-206, here 204.
71Ackermann, Die aktuellen Tarife fьrs Hacken.
72 Thilo Eckoldt. 1988. Hacker-mit einem Bein im Knast. In Das Chaos Computer Buch. Hacking  made in Germany, ed. Jьrgen Wieckmann, 154-167. Reinbek bei Hamburg: Wunderlich.
73Ackermann, Die aktuellen Tarife fьrs Hacken, 183.
74 Ibid., 192.
75 Datenschleuder 60 (1997), 25f.
76 Haft, Das Zweite Gesetze zur Bekдmpfung der Wirtschaftskriminalitдt (2. WiKG), 9; Von  Gravenreuth, Computerviren, hacker, datenspione, crasher und cracker. Ьberblick und  rechtliche Einordnung, 204; and Stefan Ernst. 2007. Das neue Computerstrafrecht. Neue  Juristische Wochenschrift 37: 2661-2666, here 2661.
                                     *186*
K. Denker
humankind could not yet relinquish them as a techno-political vanguard, especially since  penalizing hacking indicated how little hacktivism was understood. Hence, there was  alternating attraction and rejection between hackers and the state and between hackers and  the media. Just as the hackers’ merits were acknowledged in most political discussions,  politicians and commentators underlined the need to control hacking. Thus, discourses tended  to marginalize hackers by denying them any political legitimacy and declaring them to be mere  hobbyists. The Club was in jeopardy of losing its unique selling point: a group interested in  both technology and politics.
The gestures of differentiation against the left, the alternative movement and also the  allegedly obstinate and overstrained politicians, created and shaped the atmosphere in which  institutionalized hacktivism could evolve. The transforming appropriation of leftist techno- critique but also the recognition in the media and partly in the political arena created an  environment which encouraged Club members. They had to endure frustrating hostilities and  opposition. Nonetheless, successes and failures alternated in a primarily discouraging, but  still motivating way. With the computer crime legislation, the conditions of hacktivism  changed: despite trying to keep “good hacking” outside the law, the new law prepared the  ground for harsh reactions of law enforcement and for an image shift in news coverage. When  the 1986/1987 hacking attacks on networks of international institutions like CERN and NASA  were discovered, few discussions took place about striking security flaws in critical digital  infrastructures of authorities and companies in the western world.77 Although hackers  revealed again that these systems were not protected against industrial and governmental  espionage, the thin-skinned authorities initiated investigations into the Club. They raided  the Club’s rooms and its members’ apartments, providing the media with stories about computer  criminals. Wernery’s arrest in France was just the icing on the cake.
Bibliography
Achenbach, Hans. 1986. Das Zweite Gesetz zur Bekдmpfung der Wirtschaftskriminalitдt. Neue  Juristische Wochenschrift 30: 1835-1898.
Ackermann, Stephan. 1988. Die aktuellen Tarife fьrs Hacken. In Das Chaos Computer Buch.  Hacking made in Germany, ed. Jьrgen Wieckmann, 183-192. Reinbek bei Hamburg: Wunderlich.
Adorno, Theodor W., and Max Horkheimer. 1972. Dialectic of enlightenment. New York: Seabury  Press.
Ammann, Thomas. 1988. Nach uns die Zukunft. Aus der Geschichte des Chaos Computer Clubs. In  Das Chaos Computer Buch. Hacking made in Germany, ed. Jьrgen Wieckmann, 9-31. Reinbek bei  Hamburg: Wunderlich.
Bach, Hans-Peter. 1985. Verfassungsrechtliche Grundfragen von Bildschirmtext. PhD thesis,  University of Mainz.
Brunner, John. 1975. Shockwave rider. New York: Harper & Row.
77Andy Mьller-Maguhn, and Reinhard Schrutzki. 1988. Welcome to the NASA-headquarter. In Das  Chaos Computer Buch. Hacking made in Germany, ed. Jьrgen Wieckmann, 32-53. Reinbek bei  Hamburg: Wunderlich.
8 Heroes Yet Criminals of the German Computer Revolution
                                     *187*
Coleman, Gabriella. 2010. The hacker conference. Anthropological Quarterly 83(1, Winter): 47 -72.
Dietrich, Ralf. 2009. Das Erfordernis der besonderen Sicherung im StGB am Beispiel des  Ausspдhens von Daten, [Para] 202a StGB: Kritik und spezialprдventiver Ansatz,. PhD thesis,  Universitat Tьbingen.
Eckoldt, Thilo. 1988. Hacker-mit einem Bein im Knast. In Das Chaos Computer Buch. Hacking  made in Germany, ed. Jьrgen Wieckmann, 154-167. Reinbek bei Hamburg: Wunderlich.
Enzensberger, Hans Magnus. 1970. Baukasten zu einer Theorie der Medien. Kursbuch 20(1970):  159-186.
Emst, Stefan. 2007. Das neue Computerstrafrecht. Neue Juristische Wochenschrift 37: 2661- 2666.
Friesinger, Manfred. 1989. Bildschirmtext in Frankreich. Mьnchen: Fischer.
Gibson, William. 1984. Neuromancer. New York: Ace Books.
Haft, Fritjof. 1987. Das Zweite Gesetze zur Bekдmpfung der Wirtschaftskriminalitдt (2. WiKG).  Neue Zeitschrift fьr Strafrecht 1: 6-9.
Holland, Wau, et al. (eds.). 1985. Die Hackerbibel. Lцhrbach: Pieper Werner Medienexp.
Horkheimer, Max. 1974. Critique of instrumental reason. New York: Seabury Press.
Jakic, Bruno. 2014. Galaxy and the new wave: Yugoslav computer culture in 1980s. In Hacking  Europe. From computer cultures to demoscenes, ed. Gerard Alberts and Ruth Oldenziel, 107-128.  New York: Springer.
Kaps, Rolf Ulrich. 1983. Die Wirkung von Bildschirmtext auf das Informationsverhalten der  Konsumenten, Schriftenreihe der Studiengruppe Bildschirmtext. Grцbenzell: Fischer.
Kromrey, Helmut, et al. 1984. Bochumer Untersuchung im Rahmen der wissenschaftlichen  Begleitung des Feldversuchs Bildschirmtext Dьsseldorf/Neuss. Bochum: Ruhr-Universitдt.
Kuhlmann, Wolf-Dieter. 1985. Rechtsfragen des Bildschirmtext-Staatsvertrages vom 18. Mдrz  1983. PhD thesis, Universitдt Bochum.
Kulla, Daniel. 2003. Der Phrasenprьfer. Szenen aus dem Leben von Wau Holland. Lцhrbach:  Pieper and the Grьne Kraft.
Levy, Steven. 1984. Hackers: Heroes of the computer revolution. Garden City, NY: Anchor  Press/ Doubleday.
Marcuse, Herbert. 1964. One-dimensional man. Boston: Beacon Press.
Mьller-Maguhn, Andy, and Reinhard Schrutzki. 1988. Welcome to the NASA-headquarter. In Das  Chaos Computer Buch. Hacking made in Germany, ed. Jьrgen Wieckmann, 32-53. Reinbek bei  Hamburg: Wunderlich.
Nevejan, Caroline, and Alexander Badenoch. 2014. How Amsterdam invented the Internet:  European networks of significance, 1980-1995. In Hacking Europe. From computer cultures to  demoscenes, ed. Gerard Alberts and Ruth Oldenziel, 189-217. New York: Springer.
Pospischil, Rudolf. 1987. Bildschirmtext in Frankreich und Deutschland: Grundlagen u.  Konzeptionen. Nьrnberg: Verlag der Kommunikationswissenschaftlichen Forschungsvereinigung.
Sieber, Ulrich. 1977. Computerkriminalitдt und Strafrecht. Kцln: Heymann.
Stolte, Dirk. 1983. Personalsuche und Personalvermittlung mit Bildschirmtext, Schriftenreihe  der Studiengruppe Bildschirmtext. Grцbenzell bei Mьnchen: Fischer.
Traut, Bernd M. 1987. Rechtsfragen zu Bildschirmtext. Mьnchen: R. Fischer.
von Gravenreuth, Gьnter Freiherr. 1989. Computerviren, hacker, datenspione, crasher und  cracker. Ьberblick und rechtliche Einordnung. Neue Zeitschrift fьr Strafrecht, 201-206.
von Randow, Thomas. 1984. Ein Schlag gegen das System. Ein Computerclub deckt  Sicherheitslьcken im Btx-Programm der Post auf. Die Zeit 49, November 30.
Warnecke, Christoph. 1983. Bildschirmtext und dessen Einsatz, bei Kreditinstituten,  Schriftenreihe der Studiengruppe Bildschirmtext. Grцbenzell: Fischer.
Wasiak, Patryk. 2014. Playing and copying: Social practices of home computer users in Poland  during the 1980s. In Hacking Europe. From computer cultures to demoscenes, ed. Gerard Alberts  and Ruth Oldenziel, 129-150. New York: Springer.
Wieckmann, Jьrgen (ed.). 1988. Das Chaos Computer Buch. Hacking made in Germany. Reinbek bei  Hamburg: Wunderlich.
Wiesenbauer, Ludwig. 1983. Verhaltenswissenschaftliche Grundlagen der  Bildschirmtextbenutzung, Schriftenreihe der Studiengruppe Bildschirmtext. Grцbenzell:  Fischer.
Chapter 9
How Amsterdam Invented the Internet: European Networks of Significance, 1980-1995
Caroline Nevejan and Alexander Badenoch
9.1	Nets and the City1
In his discussions on the use of the Internet in civil society, the internationally renowned  sociologist Manuel Castells singled out Amsterdam as the key site of historical innovation in  Europe. Looking at developments there in the early 1990s, he identified the city’s digital  network as “a new form of public sphere combining local institutions, grassroots  organizations, and computer networks in the development of cultural expression and civic  participation.”2 Many have traced the start of the new public sphere to January 15, 1994,  when access to the Internet became available to the general public in the Netherlands via a  new dial-in service and virtual access area called De Digitale Stad (Digital City, called  DDS). Access to Digital City was open to all: anyone with a modem simply needed to dial an  Amsterdam telephone number or use one of the public terminals installed in the city.  Subsequently, the
1 This paper describes how the digital culture evolved in Amsterdam. Although the authors  appreciate that the Amsterdam’s digital culture emerged in a global context, they focus on  understanding the global context from the Amsterdam perspective. This chapter is the result  of an extended dialogue between Nevejan, a social scientist who was one actor in many of the  events described here, and Badenoch, a media historian, in consultation with print archives  and other witnesses. The authors are grateful to Geert Lovink, David Garcia, Patrice Riemens,  Marleen Stikker, Tjebbe van Tijen, and Frances Brazier for their comments and Ruth Oldenziel  and Gerard Alberts for their valuable editorial work. See also Nevejan Caroline. 2007.  Presence and the design of trust. PhD Thesis, University of Amsterdam, in which some of these  events are described from a social science perspective.
2 Manuel Castells. 2001. The Internet galaxy: Reflections on the Internet, business, and  society, 146. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
C. Nevejan
Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands e-mail: nevejan@xs4all.nl
A. Badenoch (*)
Universitй Paris IV Sorbonne, Paris, France e-mail: alecbadenoch@gmail.com
G. Alberts and R. Oldenziel (eds.), Hacking Europe. From Computer Cultures	189
to Demoscenes, History of Computing, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4471-5493-8_9,
© Springer-Verlag London 2014
                                     *190*
C. Nevejan and A. Badenoch
adoption of Internet services grew rapidly from about 300 private citizens with Internet  access before the opening to 4,000 daily users a year later, rising to 50,000 in 1997. The  short user manual was a nonfiction bestseller at bookstores in the city.3 Once in, users  found themselves in a text-based environment—a graphic interface would come a few months  later—built around the metaphor of the city. Users could visit the “post office” (send  emails), exchange gossip in cafйs, visit a number of themed city “squares,” and debate public  issues.4 Other parts of Digital City had their referents in the more material aspects of  Amsterdam. One could visit the library and consult its catalogue, visit the town hall for  municipal information, and even read pornographic stories in the sex shops. A number of  online experiments and events also took place, not least in connection with the upcoming  municipal elections. The “rooted” location of Digital City as portal to the global world,  with reference to a specific lived-in city, was the key to its participatory appeal. For the  first time in the Netherlands, a computer environment came into existence where Dutch was  spoken and where the agenda was set by Dutch social morals and codes. Thus far, the Internet  had been a specialized environment dominated by the United States, dominated by the English  language, American industry, and international nongovernmental organizations (NGOs)—a focus  also echoed in the historical literature.5 With the opening of Amsterdam Digital City, part  of the Internet turned Dutch as it was publicly connected to events in Dutch society and in a  Dutch style.6 The locally organized, broadly participatory design and use attracted a wide  range of international attention. Amsterdam Digital City was held up as an example of how the  Internet could potentially transform social life. Moreover, Amsterdam had long been a central  node in the technical infrastructure of the Internet.
As Don Slater has cautioned, based on his ethnographic exploration of Internet use in  Trinidad, we must not treat the Internet and World Wide Web as global monoliths, used the  same way the world over, but as phenomena locally appropriated for very different purposes.7  We take his point one step further to show how technologies
3 Ibid., 147; Joost Flint. 2004. DDS-10jaaranders.  http://www.dds.nl/downloads/achtergrondartikel. pdf. Accessed 16 July 2011.
4 For a demonstration of Amsterdam Digital City (DDS) Version 3.0 from the late 1990s, see  http:// www.dds.nl/downloads/DDS-3.0-presentatie.swf; a new online archive of Digital City  (in Dutch) is at http://re-dds.nl/. Accessed 21 Mar 2013.
5 In most histories of computing, “the Internet” refers to the work done by the US-based  military, research, and large-scale business actors. Similarly, the “heroes” of Internet  history are described as the lone technological innovators. See Janet Abbate. 1999. Inventing  the Internet. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press; Paul E. Ceruzzi. 2003 [1998]. A history of modern  computing. Cambridge, MA/London: MIT Press; Stephen Segaller. 1998. Nerds 2.0.1: A brief  history of the Internet. New York: TV Books; Tim Berners-Lee. 2000. Weaving the Web: The  original design and ultimate destiny of the World Wide Web. New York: HarperBusiness; and  Stephen Levy. 1984. Hackers: Heroes of the computer revolution. Garden City, NY: Anchor  Press/Doubleday.
6 Caroline Nevejan. 1995. Holiday in the Digital City of Amsterdam. Lecture to the Dutch  Ministry of Economic Affairs, February 11, unpublished manuscript in Nevejan Archives.
7 Don Slater. 2003. Modernity under construction: Building the Internet in Trinidad. In  Modernity and technology, ed. Philip Brey, Thomas J. Misa, and Andrew Feenberg, 139-160.  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
9 How Amsterdam Invented the Internet
                                     *191*
are appropriated to individual end users and how local cultures have a profound effect on the  design of networks and interfaces, including their social embedding. In the United States,  Senator and later Vice-President Al Gore of Tennessee played a key role in facilitating broad  public access to computer networks for educational purposes. When touting those achievements  as a presidential candidate, Gore was accused mockingly by his political adversaries of  claiming to have “invented the Internet.”8 While Al Gore never actually made this claim, we  argue here that such public displays of envisioning and advocating a new technology play a  significant role in emphasizing the value of creating new technologies. In taking this line  of argument, we see a stark contrast between the way the Internet was invented in Europe and  in the United States. It was not political figures like Al Gore who played the key  facilitating roles in Amsterdam but actors from a range of independent media labs and  cultural centers who worked to enable this new digital public culture.
We trace this history by showing how various actors came to converge around digital  developments over the course of the late 1980s. Firstly, we trace two parallel developments:  the growth of Amsterdam as a central node and gateway of the Internet in Europe on the one  hand and the rise of independent media and cultural centers in the 1980s on the other.  Members of these centers would become important catalysts in shaping digital developments in  the city.9 Secondly, we show how these sectors came together in the late 1980s with the  involvement of a third set of actors, the hacking community, to shape what would become  Digital City and Amsterdam’s booming digital culture.10
9.2	The Internet Comes to the Netherlands
Already a decade before the launch of Digital City, Amsterdam was a central node and gateway  for the Internet in Europe. Since the 1950s, Dutch nuclear physicists had collaborated  internationally with scientists from the United States and the USSR even at the height of the  Cold War. For physicists, the Internet’s predecessor
8 See Seth Finkelstein’s “Al Gore Invented the Internet Archive,” at http://sethf.com/gore/.  On Al Gore’s role in the US digital development, see Janet Abbate. 2010. Privatizing the  Internet: Competing visions and chaotic events, 1987-1995. IEEE Annals of the History of  Computing 31 (1): 10-22, and for praise of his role in promoting the Internet by key  architects, see http://www. politechbot.com/p-01394.html. Last accessed 15 July 2011.
9 This chapter draws on Nevejan’s archive, deposited at the International Institute for  Social History (Internationale Instituut voor Sociale Geschiedenis) Amsterdam, hereafter  Nevejan Archive). As these materials have not been catalogued at the time of writing, they  will be referred to according to the way they are currently filed. Every attempt has been  made to describe them such that they can be relocated as necessary.
10The events described here involved a large number of artists, theorists, and activists, all  of whom were important actors in shaping Amsterdam’s independent media cultures. For future  reference, we’ve mentioned them in the footnotes.
                                     *192*
C. Nevejan and A. Badenoch
was vital for exchanging large amounts of data in their international collaborations at CERN  in Geneva, Switzerland.11 The Dutch National Institute for Nuclear Physics (NIKHEF) and  national research center for Mathematics and Computer Science (CWI) were next-door neighbors.  In the early 1980s, Amsterdam’s computer scientists jumped on the bandwagon by literally  drilling a hole through the wall to connect a cable to the physicists’ adjacent building. The  connecting cable not only marked the start of the European backbone of the Internet; the  connection symbolized CWI’s role in pioneering a number of Internet developments.
In the early 1980s, it was not just academic researchers who were interested in the new  possibilities for communication and collaboration that the emerging digital communication  infrastructure offered. Smaller and larger businesses and NGOs also expressed interest in  these services. Similar to University of California, Berkeley, CWI offered accounts on their  server. Using modems in which one would put the telephone receiver in a rubber cradle, people  would “phone in” through telephone lines on the server. Many individuals began to participate  in Usenet newsgroups, which started up in 1980. One account could facilitate a group of  people to get otherwise inaccessible news and information. In 1987, civil networks like  PeaceNet and GreenNet designed bulletin board services to connect grassroots organizations  for the first time.12 Unlike today, when all involved would participate on the net, these  networks consisted of connections between nodes, around which groups of people would organize  themselves. Political organizations and solidarity movements like the antinuclear waste  movement, unions, and women’s groups sought to connect through the network in order to get  around censorship regimes and share information directly with other organizations. Various  grassroots movements in Amsterdam were linked into such networks in the 1980s.
The local interest in CWI’s connection was paralleled by its importance internationally. The  indication “.NL” became the first root domain outside the United States, and on November 17,  1988, CWI’s Piet Beertema received Europe’s first email, sent via the first nonmilitary  Internet connection between Europe and the United States. In 1990, Dutch universities started  to connect electronically and established SURF foundation, which has since become a key  European academic player.13 When CWI’s Internet service became increasingly popular over the  course of the 1980s, the organization decided to focus exclusively on research and in early  1989 allocated its services to a separate foundation, Stichting NLnet, the first independent  provider in the Netherlands.14 It was the first Internet backbone in the
11 See Abbate, Inventing. Professor Kees Braams, director of the Nuclear Physics Institute in  Rijnhuizen, was working on a regular basis with Soviet colleagues, using the ARPAnet.
12 Bulletin board services for grassroots organizations, administered by the Institute for  Global Communication: http://www.igc.org/html/aboutigc.html. Last accessed 16 July 2011.
13Annelies Vlap. 2011. Internet van en voor Nederland. Het verhaal van 25 jaar .nl, in 25  jaar .nl. In Bex*communicatie. Anniversary Publication SIDN, 30-40. Arnhem: Stichting  Internet Domeinregistratie Nederland.
14 Founders of Stichting NLnet were Ted Lindgren, Marten van Gelderen, Piet Beertema, Frances  Brazier, Wytze van der Raay, and Jos Alsters. For a brief overview of the organization’s  history, see: http://nlnet.nl/foundation/history/199804-usenix.html. Last accessed July 2011.
9 How Amsterdam Invented the Internet
                                     *193*
Netherlands, offering local dial-in and ISDN infrastructure covering the entire country. It  designed and implemented a low-cost connectivity structure without anticipating individual  service, focusing instead on institutional provision. Major NLnet customers were corporate  clients like Philips but also independents such as SURFnet, InterDoc’s Antenna, Hack-Tic  Network, and later the Internet service provider XS4ALL, who all, as we will see, played an  important role in our story.
While institutional clients caught the attention of Amsterdam’s increasingly important  network connection, public interest took another turn. Amateur computing was booming. The  Dutch Hobby Computer Club, which was started in 1977, exploded to a membership of 46,000 a  decade later, making the organization one of the largest in Europe.15 Independent of the  national telecom agencies offering coax-cable infrastructures, individual users like the  computer hobbyists developed their own practices and formats. Amsterdam City Council was also  in a position to play an important role in supporting the emerging digital developments. As  owner of the local cable infrastructure until 1995, the Council facilitated a rich local  television and radio scene with a variety of broadcasters catering to a city of only 700,000  inhabitants.16 Public events brought these disparate communities together for the first time.
9.3	Reconstructing the City: Squatting and Free Cultural Spaces
The social actors who would go on to shape Amsterdam’s Internet infrastructural node in  Europe and make it publicly available came from the city’s counterculture and squatter  movement. Creating new media spaces was part and parcel of the movement—and the struggles—to  create new forms of urban space. Many neighborhoods that had been home to the city’s Jewish  community, including the halfopen ghetto formed in 1941, became the center of these  struggles. Empty from the deportation of the city’s Jewish residents, many buildings had all  of the wood in them plundered for firewood in the difficult hunger winter of 1944/1945 and  were nevertheless nearly fully occupied after 1945, though the question of who actually owned  them remained unsettled. A law from 1947 passed to deal with the uncertain ownership of the  buildings gave the occupants of a house right to remain there unless someone else could prove  ownership. Such was the state of many old neighborhoods, like the old Jewish working-class  Nieuwmarkt neighborhood, east of
15 Frank Veraart. 2008c. Vormgevers van Persoonlijk Computergebruik: De ontwikkeling van  computers voor kleingebruikers in Nederland 1970-1990. PhD thesis, TU Eindhoven.
16 James Stappers, Frank Olderaan, and Pieter de Wit. 1991. The Netherlands: Emergence of a  new medium. In The people’s voice: Local radio and television in Europe, ed. Nick Jankowski,  Ole Prehn, and James Stappers, 90-103. London: John Libbey; Nick Jankowski. 1988. Community  television in Amsterdam access to participation in and use of the “Lokale Omroep  Bijlmermeer”. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
                                     *194*
C. Nevejan and A. Badenoch
Dam Square and the Red Light District, and a short walk from Amsterdam University. The port  had long been home to immigrants (and remains so) as well as being the center of the city’s  once-thriving Jewish community. In the 1960s, it was one of a number of neighborhoods that  came into focus for city planners and social activists alike. In technocratic plans for city  (re)construction (some of which dated from before the war), these parts would be razed and  rebuilt to accommodate more car and metro traffic through the city, as well as more non-mixed  commercial zoning, and wide, open boulevards. For social activists, by contrast, the old  building, in need of reconstruction and repair, represented a chance to build new forms of  urban community. Old houses that had been condemned were squatted, and a new inner city  communal life started to emerge in which new ways of living together with larger groups of  people, including schools, shops, businesses, and workshops, were invented. Starting in 1964,  squatting as it is currently understood, as both practical and utopian social action, began  to gain increasing attention. The anarchist group Provo, which became famous for its “white  plans” (including, most famously, free white bicycles for use in a car-free inner city),  embraced the practice and announced a “white housing plan” in 1966, in which empty houses  would have their doors painted white to announce they were available for living in.17  Typically, for social-democratic Amsterdam, the neighborhood newspaper Geillustreerd  Bethaniennieuws, among the first publications to advocate and advertise squatting, briefly  received a (small) subsidy from the City Council.18 From the late 1960s, activists had  occupied and renovated the dilapidated, often historic buildings, resulting in violent  confrontations with the authorities on several occasions. The action of squatting became  known as kraken in Dutch, street slang for breaking in, after the start of the Woningburo de  Kraker [housing agency for squatters], which helped to organize the movement in Amsterdam  starting in 1969.19 The Nieuwmarkt neighborhood became an important center for the 1960s and  1970s movement, whose leading figures came to play such an important role in shaping hacking  culture and independent media production later on in the 1980s.
One such leading figure was Tjebbe van Tijen, a visual artist and cultural coordinator in  Amsterdam, who both embodied and documented the squatter movement within the culture of the  city. A founding member of the Woningburo de Kraker, he later also became a curator at the  Amsterdam University Library where he established a collection on modern social movements. In  an article published in 1992, he recalled an event called “Free Cultural Spaces” at a soon- to-be razed property in the
17Tjebbe van Tijen. 1966. 1966: Provo’s Witte Huizenplan/White House Plan of Provo movement.  Witplan. http://witplan.wordpress.com/1966/04/25/provos-witte-huizenplanwhite-house-plan-of- provo-movement/. Accessed 31 Mar 2013.
18 Eric Duivenvoorden. 2000. Een voet tussen de deur. Geschiedenis van de kraakbeweging 1964 -1999. Amsterdam: De Arbeiderspers.
19Tjebbe van Tijen notes that the use of the word kraken stems from a decision taken in  naming the Woningburo de Kraker, in a meeting he attended that took place in the building of  Hans’t Mannetje, publisher of the Geпillustreerd Bethaniennieuws. Van Tijen, email  communication with the authors, April 1, 2013. See also Duivenvoorden, Een voet, ch. 1.
9 How Amsterdam Invented the Internet
                                     *195*
Nieuwmarkt neighborhood in 1984.20 Responding to the changing climate, the event sought to  document and take stock of the movements in Amsterdam and abroad. In particular, the event  highlighted the squatter movement’s role in creating both places to live and “free cultural  spaces,” defined by their ability to create new possibilities for cultural expression and to  form new communities. A manifesto poster produced for May 16, 1984, highlighted the  importance of Amsterdam as a center: “In Amsterdam there are now around a hundred, in the  rest of the Netherlands, many dozens.” Van Tijen listed a wide range of spaces in the city  such as music venues, theaters, galleries, and Paradiso, an old church occupied peacefully in  the late 1960s that was transformed into one of the country’s most important and  internationally renowned pop venues.21 He also mentioned virtual spaces in the “ether” in the  form of independent radio stations.
Van Tijen stressed it was not always a matter of creating something permanent, but,  especially and explicitly building on the situationist movement, the creation of new  “situations” that demonstrate (now we would say perform) new forms of behavior.22 In his  words,
The short and intense existence of a cultural ‘free space’ gives others the idea to follow  the example in one form or another. Such brief existence of cultural ‘free spaces’  nevertheless leaves behind the image of a radiant young idea without any sign of less decay  toward the loathed ruling cultural values, although it has proved unviable in the long run.
At the same time, and this would prove vital for the movement, “the creation of free cultural  spaces was not always a simple choice between ‘clean’ uncompromising, radical action or  execrable co-operation of traitors with the ruling order.”23 Indeed in many cases, including  Paradiso, agreements regarding the use of empty buildings had been reached very quickly.
Towards the mid-1980s, when conservative parties came to power in many countries,  articulating an ideology of law and order, the squatter movement changed both in Amsterdam  and in other cities such as Berlin. When the police began to remove squatters forcibly from  their houses, the new law-and-order politics polarized the political climate. In a political  compromise, large quantities of squats were legalized, while other parts of the movement were  criminalized. The compromise legitimized the squatters’ claim that it was immoral for  speculating house owners to leave spaces empty despite the housing shortages, while it  acknowledged owners’ property rights. A new law passed in 1981 required house owners to give  up buildings for use if these were empty. The effect of the law on existing squatters, and  the
20 Tjebbe van Tijen. 1992. Viije culturele ruimtes. In Gebroken wit: politiek van de kleine  verbalen, ed. Mascarpone, Irene Janze, et al. Amsterdam: Ravijn. [Available online as Tjebbe  van Tijen. 2004. Vrije Culturele Ruimtes. http://imaginarymuseum.org/VKULT. Last accessed 16  July 2011].
21 Its status as music venue in Europe is on a par with that of the Warfield Theater in San  Francisco, which was founded slightly earlier.
22 Guy Debord. 1977. Society of the spectacle. Detroit: Black & Red. On the Situationist  movement, see Greil Marcus. 2001 [1989]. Lipstick traces: A secret history of the twentieth  century. London: Faber & Faber.
23Van Tijen, Vrije Culturele Ruimtes.
                                     *196*
C. Nevejan and A. Badenoch
movement, was negligible, although it did allow house owners to create a new business in  letting properties cheaply, especially to students, to avoid squatting without creating any  legal rights for these renters so they can be forced to leave at any time.24 Although the  character of the squatter movement changed, the culture evolving in the many squats with  their endless empty spaces, once the breeding ground for a vibrant youth culture, did not  disappear. Many prominent members of the squatter movement began to reorganize themselves  around cultural and media centers in the ensuing years.25
Such new cultural centers became centers for experiment. In the 1960s, artists discovered new  media technologies as their primary medium of expression. Because making digital music and  visual images were prohibitively expensive and required special production processes,  individual artists had to organize themselves collectively around “production houses.” In the  1960s, young modern composers created the musical laboratory STEIM, which pioneered and  inspired internationally—and continues to inspire—many young composers and musicians seeking  to engage in technical innovations and new musical ideas.26 A decade later, artists  established the foundations for visual electronic arts like Montevideo and Time Based Arts.  One artist, David Garcia, would later become a key player in designing networking events for  the Next 5 Minutes conference.27 Music venues like Paradiso acquired capitalintensive PA  systems beyond the means of music bands and made them available to young performers. The  media centers collectively bought tools and technologies that were unaffordable for  individuals—thus participating in a long tradition of communal (media) consumption, such as  workers’ radio clubs in the 1920s.
Such venues facilitated a culture of independent media production, including an active print,  radio, and poster scene in which many of Amsterdam’s digital culture pioneers participated.28  The squatter movement’s weekly magazine Bluf! was edited by (among others) Caroline Nevejan,  Geert Lovink, and Peter van der Pouw Kraan, who played key roles in setting up later digital  network events. A number of local and “pirate” radio stations operated from within the  squatters’ scene in the city center.29 Marleen Stikker, who would go on to become the first  “mayor” of Digital
24A.M. Kloosterman, H.J. Rossel, and J.P. van Stempvoort. 2008. Hoofdlijnen in het huurrecht:  met vragen en antwoorden. Deventer: Kluwer.
25 The Foundation for the Advancement of Illegal Knowledge (Dutch: Bilwet) started by Geert  Lovink also stressed the connection between the squatter movement and its intricate and often  ambivalent position with regard to “the media.” See Adilkno [The Foundation for the  Advancement of Illegal Knowledge]. 1994. Cracking the Movement: Squatting Beyond the Media.  Trans. Laura Martz. New York: Autonomedia. http://thing.desk.nl/bilwet/Cracking/general.htm.  Last accessed 27 Sept 2011. See especially chapter 8.
26 http://www.steim.nl
27 http://www.montevideo.nl. Last accessed 16 July 2011. Time Based Arts and Montevideo  merged in the early 1990s.
28 For a large poster collection of the Nieuwmarkt neighborhood, see the International  Institute for Social History in Amsterdam’s website: http://zoeken.iisg.nl/search/search? action=transform&col =marc_images&lang=nl&xsl=marc_images-detail.xsl&docid=11014181_MARC
29 Geert Lovink. 1992. The theory of mixing: An inventory of free radio techniques in  Amsterdam. Mediamatic Magazine 6(4). http://www.mediamatic.net/page/5750/en?lang=en. Accessed  21
9 How Amsterdam Invented the Internet
                                     *197*
City, participated in two such radio stations and established the theater magazine Alligator,  using available desktop publishing software, as well as Live Magazine that used new media to  experiment with novel forms of political debate.30 She further organized the Wetware  conference with Geert Lovink in 1991, designed to explore the role of the human as body in  the age of “virtual reality.”31 The Zomerfestijn (summer festivals) which Stikker organized  in 1990 and 1991 included artists who were exploring technological frontiers such as Test  Department, Survival Research Laboratories, and Einsturzende Neubauten.
From the start, the independent media communities were cosmopolitan and international,  connected with networks beyond Amsterdam including Eastern Europe, where a vibrant,  independent underground culture was flourishing. In 1987, the Amsterdam squatters’ bookshop  Sjakoo launched Europe Against the Current, offering venues to show alternative, independent,  and radical views to confront what they saw as “mainstream” Europe where uniformity ruled.32  Inspired by the 1985 “Alternative Cultural Forum” in Budapest and media fairs in London and  Frankfurt, the organizers accumulated over 4,000 addresses, mobilizing an international  network of alternative bookshops, publishers, and collectors by combing through catalogues,  reviews, folders, and specialized guides. They supplied the addresses for the event’s  invitations but also became a permanent resource for further contacts. The catalogue listed  1,000 addresses. The Europe Against the Current event in September 1989 attracted 350 groups  from 21 countries. At the event, Samizdat authors and publishers from Eastern Europe met with  so-called pirate printers and often left-wing radicals from the West. In a retrospective  published in 1990, Tjebbe van Tijen noted that
[t]he multiformity, the multiplicity of opinions sought by the organizers was achieved but  not all the participants and visitors were happy with it. The culturally-oriented found the  event too political, the politicals blamed its far too cultural character. The participants  from Eastern Europe, mostly for the first time in the West, were often surprised to see the  Western European radical left groups present. Their passionate stand was exactly what they  sought to free themselves of or what they tried at least to flee.33
Budding computer communication began to play an increasingly important role in connecting  many local, independent media with networks beyond Amsterdam. Through PeaceNet and GreenNet,  which, for example, reported the April 26, 1986, Chernobyl Nuclear plant disaster two whole  days before the news appeared in
May 2011; Geert Lovink. 1995. ‘Listen or Die’: A history of the punk hard core pirate station  ‘Radio Death’, Amsterdam 1985-1987. Bilwet. http://thing.desk.nl/bilwet/TXT/DOOD.ENG.txt.  Last accessed 27 Sept 2011.
30 Interview with Stikker, September 26, 2011.
31 See Adilkno, Foundation for the Advancement of Illegal Knowledge, “Hardware, Software,  Wetware,” posted June 17, 1996, by Geert Lovink on nettime: http://www.nettime.org/Lists- Archives/ nettime-l-9606/msg00026.html; Geert Lovink, Rik Delhaas, and Laura Martz (eds.).  1991. Wetware. Amsterdam: De Balie.
32Tjebbe van Tijen. 1990. Europa tegen de stroom. De Gids 153(6): 466-471. [English  translation available online Going against the grain, Europe against the current,  http://www.imaginarymu-seum.org/ETS/ETSeng.html. Accessed 30 Jan 2014]
33 Ibid.
                                     *198*
C. Nevejan and A. Badenoch
regular newspapers, the squatters’ magazine Bluf! effectively scooped major newspapers. It  featured news reports that were unavailable such as the revolution in Nicaragua and the  anti-apartheid struggle in South Africa. Bluf! editor Geert Lovink left the magazine in 1983  and spent more and more time in West Berlin, where he built a network of squatters and media  theorists. Like in Amsterdam, the squatter movement in Berlin maintained strong ties with the  established intellectual and left political scenes but was more politically passionate and  intense.34 Building on contacts made at the Amsterdam Europe Against the Current event,  Lovink established connections with like-minded people in Eastern Europe from his Berlin  base, particularly after the wall came down, when he was able to travel throughout Eastern  Europe. His contacts enabled Amsterdam’s cultural centers to invite Central and Eastern  Europeans to their conferences and to establish long-term relationships with some.
The Amsterdam cultural and media centers also collaborated with centers being set up at the  same time elsewhere in the Netherlands. In the southern city of Den Bosch, V2, the center of  Unstable Media, explored electronic arts in a squat in 1981. In the northern city of  Groningen, long dominated by socialist politics, the Mediamatic Foundation began in 1986,  first with Mediamatic magazine, before transforming around 1990 into a creative multimedia  lab, organizing underground shows and performances as well as doing commercial consultancy.35  In 1986, activist Michael Polman started up the Antenna network in the Catholic capital  Nijmegen, hotbed of the emerging liberation theology movement, which connected grassroots  organizations from all over the world on a daily basis. Through regular meetings, the  organizations exchanged vital information and collectively decided how to mobilize politics  for issues they shared.36 Despite operating in the periphery of Amsterdam’s evolving  networks, Antenna’s worldwide connections had a significant impact on Dutch digital culture.  It opened up its worldwide network at various conferences, thus providing the counter  movement with a global reach. While these groups were independently involved in a number of  networks worldwide, they did not collaborate until a new network event, the Galactic Hacker  Party (GHP), brought them together in 1989 to focus on digital issues.
34 Freia Anders. 2010. Wohnraum, Freiraum, Widerstand. Die Formierung der Autonomen in den  Konflikten um HausbesetzungenAnfang der achtziger Jahre. In Das alternative Milieu.  Antibьrgerlicher Lebensstil und linke Politik in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland und Europa  1968-1983, ed. Sven Reichard and Detlef Siegfried, 473-498. Gцttingen: Wallstein Verlag. See  also the newly started online project:  http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:WikiProjekt_Autonome_und_Hausbesetzer-Bewegung#Medien
35V2 was founded by Alex Adriaansens and Joke Brouwer; Mediamatic was an initiative of Willem  Velthoven and Jans Possel.
36Antenna, founded to support NGOs, local government, and educational institutions by  introducing and facilitating ICT, became the ICT partner for around 500 organizations  worldwide. Since 1993, Antenna has supported almost all development, emancipation, and  environment organizations in the Netherlands. An archive of the Association for Progressive  Communication Newsgroups is online at Occasio Digital Social History Archive:  http://socialhistory.org/en/collections/occasio. See also the introduction to the archive at  http://socialhistory.org/sites/default/files/docs/archiving-electronic_messages.pdf. Both  last accessed 1 Apr 2013.
9 How Amsterdam Invented the Internet
                                     *199*
9.4	Network Events in a Rapidly Changing World:
Computer Squatting
As the squatter movement increasingly channeled its energy into media and cultural centers in  the late 1980s, a new form of independent media engagement came to the fore: computer  hacking. Much hacking culture had arisen as a countercultural movement, not only in the  United States, aimed at what was seen as an increasingly technocratic society symbolized by  computers. By understanding rather than fearing the tools of computers, hackers could subvert  the process by appropriating them for their own goals.37 In Dutch, many words to describe  hacking came from English usage; the words “hacking” and “phone phreaking” filled the pages  of the Dutch hacker zine Hack-Tic. Alongside these, however, came a Dutch translation:  computerkraken, best translated as “computer squatting.” The term had a similarly energizing  effect on the way the practice was considered by proponents and skeptics alike.
In the summer of 1988, after the German Chaos Computer Club surprised the world with a  spectacular hacking act, Nevejan, then programmer of Amsterdam’s music temple Paradiso,  sought to demonstrate the great potential of the Internet on its stage. With the help of  Bluf! colleague Pouw Kraan and computer science professor I.S. Herschberg of the Delft  University of Technology, who collaborated with 20-year-old hacker Rop Gonggrijp, she  contacted Chaos Computer Club in the German social-democratic city of Hamburg.38 Founded in  1981 by Wau Holland and others in the offices of the leftist newspaper Die Tageszeitung, the  Chaos Computer Club hacked Deutsche Bank in the summer of 1988, wiring a hundred thousand  German Marks into their own account within one night. At the press conference the next  morning, they publicly wired the money back, stating that their act showed Deutsche Bank  could not be trusted.39 The breathtaking stunt inspired Paradiso to organize the Chaos Info  Show on November 13, 1988.40 Steffen Wernery, Wau Holland, and Bernd Fix presented Chaos  Computer Club’s work and ideas on Paradiso’s stage. Among the audience were Dutch  journalists, Hobby Computer Club members, and individuals interested in the emerging  phenomenon of digital technology and hacking. The drama was not lost on the audience as  fundamental issues were played out on stage. While publicly maintaining a “Robin Hood” image,  Chaos Computer Club asked fundamental questions about democracy, privacy, and security.  Wernery had just been released after serving 2 months in a French prison when Dutch  electronic multinational Philips had sued him for hacking their work.
37Veraart, Vormgevers, 62.
38 Gonggrijp, an established and prominent hacker at that time, has remained a public figure  in the Netherlands. He initiated successful protests against the use of non-privacy-protected  voting computers in the Netherlands; more recently, he made headlines as the “coproducer” of  the video Collateral Murder released by Wikileaks in April 2010. See his website  http://rop.gonggri.jp/
39 See Kai Denker. 2014. Heroes yet criminals of the German computer revolution. In Hacking  Europe. From computer cultures to demoscenes, ed. Gerard Alberts and Ruth Oldenziel, 167-188.  New York: Springer.
40 Program and production notes Nevejan Archive, Folder “Chaos Info Show.”
                                     *200*
C. Nevejan and A. Badenoch
From the beginning, the political debate focused on how to engage young hackers with their  responsibility as “tech-savvy” citizens, who could use the new technology either to create or  to destroy. All Chaos Computer Club’s hacks and publicity in the late 1980s sought to  challenge social democracy and promote grassroots democracy. As Kai Denker shows in his  contribution, during the same period, however, hacking was also increasingly criminalized in  Germany and internationally.41
After the event at Paradiso, Nevejan, Gonggrijp, and Patrice Riemens drove to Hamburg to meet  Chaos Computer Club members in their home city for the annual conference in December 1988.42  On the way home, Gonggrijp articulated his initial ideas for establishing the computer  journal Hack-Tic. Together, the three formed plans to host an event in Amsterdam devoted to  hacking.43 The subsequent event, Galactic Hacker Party or International Conference on  Alternative use ofTechnology Amsterdam (ICATA 89), brought together for the first-time  hackers from all over the world in a public event, linked both physically and via Internet  connection. Through communication expert professor Cees Hamelink at the University of  Amsterdam, who was instrumental in developing UNESCO’s policy on balanced flow of information  (as opposed to free flow), the organizers made contact with UNESCO and participants in Brazil  and Nairobi.44 While the press focused on hacking and hackers, the organizers successfully  assembled a broad coalition of stakeholders, including all the earlier mentioned initiatives,  labs, and collectives. Only after the event did Amsterdam Council begin to realize the city’s  special status as a center of innovation and so supported the organizers’ bid to have the  conference’s final manifesto published under the auspices of UNESCO. In its letter to UNESCO,  the City Council pointed out that “the organization of this conference is possible because  the Netherlands, unlike many other countries, do not as yet have legislation that makes  ‘hacking’ without criminal motives an offense.”45 Indeed, the law in the Netherlands was not  changed until March 1, 1993, and Dutch hacking law still counts as more limited than  elsewhere.46
The Center for Cooperative Technology, led by professor Gerard de Zeeuw, supported GHP from  the beginning, helping out with the physical network as well as inviting their network of  cyberneticians. That is why Gordon Pask, the communications specialist, came to lecture on  entropy. At the Paradiso event, several Chaos Computer Club (CCC) members as well as members  of the New York-based hacker’s club 2,600 were present. Nodes in Brazil, New Zealand, and  Kenya reported their perspective on digital networks, suggesting that hacking be seen “not as  a middle-class northern issue, but more as universal. Maybe the real hackers are
41 Denker, op.cit. fn 39.
42 Ralf Rudolf. 1988. Erste Eindrьcke zum CCC Congress ’88. Die Datenschleuder 28-29(1988) at  http://www.offiziere.ch/trust-us/ds/28/010_Erste_Eindruecke.html. Last accessed July 2011.
43 Nevejan, Holiday.
44 Patrice Riemens to Cees Hamelink, July 2, 1989, Nevejan Archive, Galactic Hacker Party,  Folder “Organisatie.”
45A.W. Jansen to Claude Ondobo, director of UNESCO International Programme for the  Development of Communication, October 25, 1989, Nevejan Archive, Galactic Hacker Party.
46A recent ruling (March 9, 2011) held that hacking into a Wi-Fi network was not a crime  under Dutch Law (Article 138a) that strictly covers breaching the security of a physical  computer.
9 How Amsterdam Invented the Internet
                                     *201*
(?) 6?????1? HMXU fаtty ™ IOTA'83™
Fig. 9.1 ‘ ‘Your Network: An Artist’s Impression.” This sketch was created in preparation for  the Galactic Hacker Party at the Paradiso in Amsterdam in 1989. A schematic diagram showing  both the machines located at the event and the connections abroad, its simple, accessible  form reflects the goals of the organizers: to demystify the Internet by turning it into a  participatory technology. Source: International Institute for Social History in Amsterdam
found in the South instead of the North, because there they are no longer trying to see it as  a universal possibility for communication.”47 For the event, the organizers created a  computer infrastructure (Fig. 9.1) connecting Paradiso with other regions
47 “Link with Nairobi,” ICATA 1989 draft proceedings, Nevejan Archive, Galactic Hacker Party.
                                     *202*
C. Nevejan and A. Badenoch
and installed 20 computers with user-friendly, down-to-earth instructions for conferencing  such as “1. Don’t Panic, 2. Find a free terminal, 3: Try to get a menu that looks like this:  1. Conference 2. Modem 3. Report 4. Leave message.” After explaining what each command did,  the instruction simply read: “Try this!”48 In the final months of the Cold War, the  conference brought together a unique and diverse group of people. American guests  participated like Captain Crunch (John Draper), the best known phone phreak at the time, and  Lee Felsenstein, the Berkeley Community Memory project initiator and Homebrew Computer Club  member. In the plenary session, the computers made worldwide connections. When first making  contact with Amsterdam hackers, the US hackers also tried to control the event’s message.49  Using San Francisco’s Teleport, a so-called picturetel connection was made with three  Russians from Star City, near Moscow. The Dutch-based Antenna presented its worldwide  connections by going live with South Africa on the big screen, while simultaneously providing  a protected place for open debates about sensitive political issues of the day. Most  memorably, a heated debate took place between Pengo, a young hacker arrested with two friends  for collaborating with the KGB, and CCC founder Wau Holland, who disapproved of their  choices. Pengo responded to the accusation by arguing that collaboration with major  corporations such as Philips amounted to a similar level of co-option.50 The Art Heafties,  local techno-punks, provided a lightshow and soundscape, framing the gathering as an artistic  rather than political event devoted entirely to hacking. The event also hosted a separate  “hack room” in Paradiso, where many hackers gathered. The audience consisted of hackers,  people from industry, social scientists, representatives of national security agencies, and  artists exploring art and technology.
The event made both national and international news. The Wall Street Journal front page  headline was “Nerds of the World Unite,” the French daily Libйration devoted an issue to “Le  Bal des Voleurs,” and the British Guardian wrote an extensive article.51 Within 3 days, a  local/global digital culture had emerged, on stage and online, that connected people and  organizations, and it has lasted since then. While the conference sessions engaged in debates  on how the computer could be a tool for democracy, by contrast, Dutch media reports focused  on legality issues and computerkraken.52 Many mainstream Dutch media outlets also highlighted  the secretive and anarchistic nature of the hackers in the hack room. The magazine
48 “Conferencing,” Unnumbered document, Nevejan Archive, Galactic Hacker Party.
49The US hacker Craig Larsen wrote to the organizers: “I feel this is an historical event of  tremendous importance. This is the first time in history that the cyberheroes of the East  Coast, West Coast and Europe will all be aligned together” and described the event as a  “Euro-American techno summit,” email Craig Larsen to Hack-Tic, July 20, 1989, Nevejan  Archive, Galactic Hacker Party, Folder “Organisatie.”
50 ICATA 1989 draft proceedings, Nevejan Archive, Galactic Hacker Party.
51 Mark M. Nelson. 1989. Nerds of the world unite - And defend their right to hack. Wall  Street Journal Europe, August 7; Informatique: Le Bal des Voleurs. Liberation no. 2551  (August 5, 1989).
52Talks included “the computer as a tool for democracy” (Lee Felsenstein), “Citizen  networks,” and “Social Consequences of AI.” Program, Galactic Hacker Party, Nevejan Archive,  Galactic Hacker Party.
9 How Amsterdam Invented the Internet
                                     *203*
Hack-Tic rejoiced that the event “brought more hackers together than 10 laws could ban!”53  Another independent magazine did express some reservations, though. “Those stealthily working  the keys in the hack room did not answer questions or explain what they were up to. The  visitor was shut out. “You know, I feel like an illiterate’ said a curious but non-hacking  visitor.”54 While the mainstream Dutch press either focused on hackers’ activities as a  problematic domain of the technically literate elite or sensationalized them, the alternative  press forced the issue politically, demanding greater access to the tools that would unlock  the new domain.
The second installment of the event occurred under radically changed circumstances. In  Amsterdam, like in many other cities with a reputation for tolerance towards gays, the  unfolding AIDS epidemic changed the cultural and political landscape fundamentally. With no  cure in sight, a strong social prejudice reignited against gays. When blood transfusion and  infected needles were identified as the cause and women also started to have AIDS, many young  people were confronted with illness or friends dying. The sense of innocence and the joy of  sexual liberation facilitated by contraception came to an end overnight. When in June of 1990  the US government prohibited people with AIDS or HIV from travelling to the states to attend  the World AIDS conference in San Francisco, Paradiso decided to host a shadow conference and  welcome people with HIV and AIDS. The Galactic Hacker Party organization, along with David  Garcia, Heleen Riper, Matthew Lewis, and Rolf Pixley, decided to create the International  Conference on Alternative Technology for AIDS (ICATA90) nicknamed the Seropositive Ball (Fig.  9.2). The Amsterdam branch of ACT UP, HIV Union, National Health Service, AIDS fund, parents  of children with HIV organizations, the Buddy project, and others established a broad  coalition with financial support from the Dutch Ministry of Health. The Center for  Cooperative Technology at the University of Amsterdam, headed by Gerard de Zeeuw, assisted  Pixley in creating a network that anticipated many of the features of the current World Wide  Web graphical interface. The development notes stressed: “In the attempt to bypass the usual  terminal interface and complicated command structures of E-news and E-mail, we are developing  hypercard communication programs that will require only the address and message to be typed.  All other actions will be executed by clicking on buttons with a mouse.”55 Using hypercard  stacks distributed by mail and the university’s digital infrastructure, the network succeeded  in including the AIDS wards in Amsterdam’s Academic Hospital, Cornell University in New York  State, and San Francisco’s General Hospital.56 These stacks featured an online art gallery  and “the AIDS stack” a large database of information developed by Michael Tidmus.57 The
53 Hack-Tic 5-6(1989): 3.
54 ICATA ’89 or Galactic Hacker Party?. NN: Blad tegen de toekomst 37 (August 10, 1989): 9.
55 Notes from Rolf Pixley, May 12, 1990, Nevejan Archive, Seropositive Ball, Folder “0 + 0  Network.”
56 On hypercard, see “Hypercard gone but not forgotten,” Wired (August 14, 2002) http://www.  wired.com/gadgets/mac/commentary/cultofmac/2002/08/54365
57Artists who contributed to the first ever online art gallery were Max Kisman, Peter  Mertens, and Jan Dietvorst among others. Unfortunately, due to digital erosion, the art  gallery no longer exists.
                                     *204*
C. Nevejan and A. Badenoch
oeo
THE SEROPOSITIVE
???on LINE FOR AIDS 90
HOW AIDS CHANGES OUR WORLD
TW UtOPOVTrvi ua «	?	ruiono U.Nr*· · · ???? ?·?«· ·' ? W< Wmm tea* }l I / 00 tei  aatf tea* ft 1« 00 te> · ???· <*«k ???
UUDUn OO Uhhi»| *1 ????«·. illU»	?»?/?«1??<· ?????? «•i1··. ,«¦ WVC Ate» ?· 1MTINU  KunWt StlMI
?? (im	V« 1? ??#? I(«?? ?· tlih· P»a«*«t tfw (·* ?? i M* (?? AO MOW »« "Outs «?   n Tirfirmi  *a Ui
lurf hdil for ?J Uoi /10,· / lid·« ?·» ? ??? /2$.· (· wmfcnv>wp ILJ·)
PAIACXSO Wftfnaftdwt »1. 1017 SC A·»»«*··. tW fetWW·* Urpfci·. . ]| 70 2A4S7I /.JIM 7)7 ? f«i  . J| 70 777771.
( MAH po.·*» ???» * MC mi ft00*AM ON II0UIST
Fig. 9.2 Poster for the Seropositive Ball, ICATA 1990. Created by Jan Dietvorst, this simple,  yet visually powerful design of a gold circle in an ‘Yves Klein’ blue square captures both  the “zero” implied in the title, as well as the global nature of the crisis. The colors  sought to evoke both the feelings of celebration and mourning represented by the event.  Although hung mostly in the Netherlands, its text in English projected the underlining  international community the poster was addressing within and beyond the city of Amsterdam
organization established public access points with Act Up in San Francisco, Simon Watson’s  Project Space in New York, several Amsterdam bookshops, and Paradiso. Some AIDS patients at  home were connected as well. Computer company Apple
ICATA
BALL
Samples of the AIDS stack can be found in Nevejan Archive, Seropositive Ball, Folder “0 + 0  Network.”
9 How Amsterdam Invented the Internet
                                     *205*
had a policy of joining in the fight against AIDS at the time and provided dozens of  computers both within Paradiso and other public spots, as well as in AIDS wards and for  patients at home.58 Under public pressure, even the US State Department felt a need to issue  an official statement to explain the Reagan administration’s AIDS policy at the opening of  the conference by the Dutch Minister of Health with the HIV Union chairman. Over 150 artists  contributed: musicians, theater performers, visual artists, filmmakers, and more. For those  involved in the Seropositive Ball, the event was memorable. From a technology perspective,  the Seropositive Ball network showed the significant impact of a good graphic interface for  the uninitiated and for new network users. Network users needed no learning curve. One email  from a small AIDS ward in the city shows how quickly caregivers and patients took to the  interface:
Currently we are looking after four patients. Unfortunately they are too ill to be able to  participate in the Sero + net activities. The staff is too busy with their daily activities  and therefore also unable to take part in the ongoing conversations, but they are very  interested in the Ball. They admire the wonderful art gallery and value the information in  the stack and the news. And they would like to hear from you in Paradiso about the events.  Tonight the night shift will certainly have time to take note of your messages and will pass  them on to patients and staff here.59
The newcomers used the new technologies with such intensity, driven by the desire to find  treatments or to be in touch with people in the same situation. Often, tears were shed when  the computers were collected again after the event. The idea of vital information as driver  for technological innovation became the key lesson of the Amsterdam event.
Both events, at which hackers from all over the world met and engaged in debates with social  activists, artists, politicians, administrators, large medical organizations, and security  services, benefitted from the production sites and cultural centres that had emerged in the  city since the 1960s. They also became the birthplace for foundations building a new media  landscape. The events provided a platform for Dutch digital culture to present itself and  helped identify key players who are still important today.
9.5	New Networks and Centers: 1993 as the Year of Change
The possibilities of the new digital age raised by the two ICATAs began to spin out and take  root in strengthening Amsterdam as a network node locally and in forming new global networks.  Internationally, the electronic border-crossings performed at the ICATA events became even  more significant due to the dramatic political changes occurring in Europe. Cultural centers  became important civil society sites
58The documentation folder for the event contains the booklet, “Where does Apple stand on  AIDS,” produced by Apple in Cupertino, April 1990. Caroline Nevejan to Helen Goossens, Apple  Europe July 5, 1990, Nevejan Archive, Seropositive Ball, Folder “June 1990.”
59 Proceedings, Seropositive Ball, 1990, Nevejan Archive, Seropositive Ball.
                                     *206*
C. Nevejan and A. Badenoch
in the process of democratization, most evident in Eastern Europe. After the Berlin Wall fell  in 1989, the Soros Foundation deliberately funded society organizations such as media  centers, conferences, and networks to facilitate democratic processes after the breakdown of  the communist states, building on network connections already forged before the wall came  down. Centers in this network such as the Fine Arts Documentation Center in Budapest—founded  in 1985 already and one of the important centers in connection with Amsterdam—became major  connection points.60 The members of this network of independent media centers eventually  formed the International Contemporary Art Network (iCAN) based in Amsterdam.
Building on these connections, Paradiso launched the Next 5 Minutes conference (January 8-10,  1993) to explore the role of independent media in these changing societies and global  networks.61 They felt the dichotomies between underground/ dominant, right/left or  independent/mainstream no longer matched the media landscape. To pinpoint the more flexible  nature of new media configurations and identify cracks in the existing media landscapes, they  chose the term “tactical television,” drawing on the cultural theory of Michel de Certeau.62  At first, they mostly ignored the Internet (although Hack-Tic did run a session at the  conference) and focused on the new possibilities of independent television enabled by  portable camcorders for spreading information and making connections outside formal  communication channels.63 The organizers were driven by the idea that such new affordable  technologies could create an alternative media sphere to the rigid domination of the Reagan  and Thatcher years. Through the Antenna network, media makers in the southern hemisphere from  Brazil to Burma, from the Aboriginals’ satellite in Australia to New York’s Paper Tiger, were  well represented. Lovink, with Soros Foundation funding, involved over 25 media makers from  Eastern Europe, including those who had started the Romanian Revolution in Timisoara  Television
60 Soros Centers for Contemporary Arts, http://www.c3.hu/scca/index.html. Last accessed 6 Oct  2011.
61 David Garcia (Time Based Arts), Geert Lovink (Bilwet), Geke van Dijk and Bas Raijmakers  (Amsterdam Cultural Studies), Menno Grootveld (Robotnik TV), Raul Maroquin (Hoeksteen TV),  and Caroline Nevejan (Paradiso) all sought new perspectives on the emerging media landscape,  gathering best practices and new theory, which resulted in the publication of the Zapbook and  the first Next Five Minutes (N5M) program. In the next installment, the second N5M, their  media critique was directed mostly at the Internet. The nettime mailing list, moderated in  several languages and including editors Patrice Riemens and Geert Lovink (Amsterdam), Pit  Schulz (Berlin), and Ted Byfield (New York), was instrumental in this development. Since  then, N5M has evolved into a larger network that organizes conferences and education around  the globe. In 2013, Erik Kluytenberg, programmer at De Balie, is the catalyst in this  network.
62 Jeroen van Bergeijk, Geke van Dijk, Karel Koch, and Bas Raimakers (eds.). 1992. N5M  Zapbook: Working papers. Amsterdam:	Paradiso.  http://www.tacticalmediafiles.net/TMF_documents/ N5Mzapbook.pdf, esp. 25. Last accessed 6 Oct  2011; Michel de Certeau. 1984. The practice of everyday life. Berkeley: University of  California Press.
63 Karel Koch. 1992. Introduction: The camcorder revolution, in Bergeijk et al. eds.,  N5MZapbook, 29. Program, “Next Five Minutes,” January 8-10, 1993, Nevejan Archive, Folder  “Press Now tot/ met zomer 1995.” The next installment of N5M expanded the idea to “tactical  media” and brought the Internet into focus.
9 How Amsterdam Invented the Internet
                                     *207*
Studios.64 The rich local television outlets in Amsterdam and other Dutch cities participated  as well. In the wake of this and subsequent meetings, the nettime mailing lists forged an  ongoing English-language discussion group for Internet critique.65
The war that broke out in Yugoslavia in 1991 threw the international situation into sharper  relief. Young refugees from former Yugoslavia came to Amsterdam. Paradiso, De Balie, and  Index on Censorship initiated Press Now and organized support for independent media in former  Yugoslavia. Working through both diplomatic and underground channels, Amsterdam activists  developed programs dealing with the war in collaboration with Belgrade’s independent radio  station B92, the beacon for many teenagers who had fled. The radio station cum music hall  became an Internet center early on. B92 director Veran Matic and Dragan Pantic, director of  their Internet group, regularly visited Amsterdam to participate in debates and share their  experiences. Since the Balkan Wars fed on media propaganda, B92’s counter information was  vital as it created a network of independent radio stations, representing a youth culture  determined to counteract the older generation’s war propaganda. On July 1,1993, during the  long siege of Sarajevo, B92 radio, Amsterdam Paradiso, and Belgrade B92’s Internet group  supported by the Dutch public broadcaster VPRO joined in the program “Music, War and Radio”  for one night of broadcasting in the hope of accessing the network of independent radio  stations using the Internet as well.66 B92’s organizers came to Amsterdam, while VPRO  journalist Erwin Blom visited the radio studio in Belgrade. Well-known Dutch rock bands  played the songs of Yugoslavian rock bands. Krist Novoselic, Nirvana’s bass player,  originally from Zagreb, gave a talk via telephone. Well-respected British journalist Misha  Glenny for The Guardian and BBC, writer of The Fall of Yugoslavia (1992), addressed the crowd  in a somber mood.67 And when B92 was under siege and threatened with having all its  broadcasts stopped, XS4ALL pioneered the new possibilities of Internet radio and granted the  station a worldwide audience. Soon after, the BBC Internet department took over the  connection, guaranteeing that B92 never stopped playing.
Besides these global connections, between 1990 and 1992, the Hack-Tic Network and its  magazine were important catalysts in shaping public development of digital connections  locally. The Dutch node in the international hacker communities’ network, along with 2,600 in  New York and Chaos Computer Club in Germany, created a steadily growing community. Even  though boys with a specific sense of humor that excluded others dominated the network, Hack- Tic played a
64 On the videos, see Tjebbe van Tijen. 1993. A context for collecting the new media. In Next  5 Minutes Video Catalogue, catalogue of videotapes shown during the festival on tactical  television held in Paradiso Amsterdam, 8-10 January 1993, ed. Bas Raijmakers and Tjebbe van  Tijen. Amsterdam: International Institute of Social History. Online at  http://socialhistory.org/sites/ default/files/docs/collecting-new-media.pdf. Accessed 1 Apr  2013.
65 See http://www.nettime.org/
66 Program, “Press, War and Radio,” Nevejan Archive, Folder “Press Now tot/met zomer 1995.”
67 Ibid.
                                     *208*
C. Nevejan and A. Badenoch
significant role in the ongoing political debates and practices. Its visual appearance and  written tone reflected the subcultural Do-It-Yourself publishing aesthetics. As an indication  of its importance, security services, policy makers, and large companies subscribed to Hack- Tic magazine. Equipped with a disclaimer (“information here is for educational purposes. Use  of this information could be punishable/ dangerous to the state/naughty”) and a reassurance  to readers that they could subscribe anonymously—the magazine was sent in a plain brown  wrapper: “If you have a position in society, you just need to put money and your address in  an envelope and send that to our PO Box. We know what to do.”68
Hackers’ ability to be “public” to the extent they were in the Netherlands changed almost  literally overnight on March 1, 1993, when a new law on “computer criminality” went into  effect that for the first time made it explicitly illegal to gain unauthorized access to a  secured place on a computer.69 In so doing, this act enshrined in Dutch legal code the  cultural link between squatting and hacking that had been established in the years before.  Section 138 of the code is on breaking and entering, called “huisvredebreuk” (literally  “disturbing the peace of a home”); section 138a, which prohibits hacking, defines its crime  as “computervredebreuk”: disturbing the peace of a computer. In response to the new law, the  Hack-Tic group shifted its focus beyond the hackers’ community to explore more popular uses  of the Internet.70 As Hack-Tic told its readers: “It is important that the Internet community  becomes a more balanced reflection of the ‘normal’ world. Right now people with money and  power are over-represented.”71 In May 1993, the group started XS4ALL, a public access Unix  system, open 24 h a day. Subscriptions were available to anyone for 75 Dutch guilders for 3  months to help cover the system’s operating costs and lease of lines. Going public also  carried a paradox, the activists realized. Creating broad access meant asking users not to  hack via their system out of fear that the authorities would shut them down. The new owners  cited the “free flow of information” upheld in the Galactic Hacker Party manifesto as the  higher goal. “When you look at it, we become lackeys of the paranoid system administrators in  the world. That would have been difficult to live with if we had not believed, that thanks to  our combined presence on the Internet, we might also change the atmosphere on the net.”72 The  declaration signaled the start of a new era seeking to create public engagement with the  Internet. When XS4ALL began, it could hardly handle the number of new
68 Colophon. Hack-Tic 1(1989): 2.
69 Officially Wet van, December 23, 1992, Stb. 1993, 33. History and full text of the law in  Kornelis I.J. Mollema, et al. 1993. Computercriminaliteit: De wetgeving, de gevolgen voor  bedrijven en de accountant. Deventer: Kluwer. See also P. Kleve, R.V. Mulder, and C. van  Noortwijk. 2010. ICT Criminaliteit. In Criminaliteit en criminaliteitsbestrijding in  Nederland, ed. Erwin Roelof Muller, et al., 259-288. Deventer: Kluwer; Hanneke. 1993. Wet  computercriminaliteit. Hack-Tic 20-21(1993): 4-11.
70 See articles in Hack-Tic 20-21(1993); Reinder Rustema. 2001. The rise and fall of DDS. MA  thesis, University of Amsterdam.
71 *.hactic.nl. Hack-Tic 20-21(1993): 18.
72 Ibid., 20. They did, however, offer one month’s free access to anyone who could hack their  system with instructions.
9 How Amsterdam Invented the Internet
                                     *209*
subscribers. Initially aiming for 500 subscribers in its first month, it got them within its  first day.
A second generation of digital activists then took the lead. Marleen Stikker, a programmer at  the center for political debate De Balie (adjacent to Paradiso), involved the center in the  subsequent digital developments. De Balie was founded in 1982 by Felix Rottenberg, former  chair of the young socialists and later of its parent organization the Dutch Labor Party  PvdA, in order to engage young people politically and culturally in renewing the party with  grassroots politics. By 1989 already, De Balie had organized a series of lectures and  exhibitions on technological culture.73 Stikker herself became particularly inspired by  working with Press Now to explore the medium as a means of revitalizing public culture.74  From De Balie, Stikker brought together a group of thinkers; developers and digital activists  explore the possibilities to develop civic access to the Internet. The so-called city plan  group was searching for a narrative that would facilitate “ordinary people” to engage in  online civic initiatives. As a result, they invented the concept of the Digital City.75 Later  in the summer of 1993, Hack-Tic Network organized Hacking at the End of the Universe (HEU), a  follow-up to the Galactic Hacker Party, at a campsite where 3,000 participants hooked up  their computers in tents for the first time.76 Besides collaborative hacking, debates  centered on the information society, privacy, and security.
Right from the start, and thanks to their deep ties to the political establishment, Stikker  and De Balie succeeded in mobilizing political and financial support as well as a commitment  from Amsterdam City Council. Reineke van Meerten, then the Council’s project manager for  telecommunication and informatics policy, played a crucial role in steering the project  through the Council. The city agreed to finance Digital City as a 10-week pilot project in  the lead-up to the municipal elections. The Ministry of Economic Affairs also contributed.  The start-up capital for Digital City totaled 300,000 guilders. In the fall of 1993, Digital  City became a foundation. Together with XS4ALL (and Mediamatic), they moved into an old  building at Prins Hendrikkade, sharing lines, modem and data centers, systems maintenance,  and the helpdesk. NLnet sponsored the new initiatives.77
Digital City was an instant success. Within months it had over 10,000 inhabitants, receiving  European and worldwide attention. The first interface to Digital City was a classic black  screen with white letters.78 Its success increased even more when the organizers launched  Digital City’s first graphical interface to the net. With the help of designers Michael van  Eeden, Marjolein Ruig, Mieke Gerritsen, and Rob
73The organizers were Michiel Schwarz and Rein Jansma.
74Authors’ interview with Marleen Stikker, September 26, 2011.
75 Members of the City Plan Group included Geert Lovink, Menno Grootveld, Geke van Dijk, Bas  Raijmakers, Joost Flint, Felipe Rodrigues, Paul Jongsma, Walter van der Cruijse, and Bert  Mulder.
76 Hacking at the End of the Universe. Hack-Tic 22-23(1993): 3.
77 Interview with Stikker.
78 Digital City 1.0 was designed by Marleen Stikker and Felipe Rodriguez. Digital City 3.0  was designed by Michael van Eeden, Marjolein Ruyg, Rob van der Haar, and Marleen Stikker.
                                     *210*
C. Nevejan and A. Badenoch
Fig. 9.3 Envisioning the Internet: It was 1994: the emerging Internet was still clunky, still  steeped in the culture of the military and engineering, from which it came. Enter the Dutch  “Digital City” project, an alliance of activists, squatters, and members of local government.  These pioneering users broke with engineering-based interfaces of letters and code. Building  on this ground breaking start, the design continued to develop rapidly, resulting in this  third, updated interface introduced in 1995. This image—and Digital City’s approach—imagines  the Internet as a city unto itself. Each octagon on the screen represents different activist  groups in the city, from Gay Square to news-junkie politicos, side-by-side in the city  everyday institutions and places, such as city hall and the city library. Source: published  online at re: DDS http://re-dds.nl/vondsten/FolderDDS3-telnr.pdf under creative commons  licence CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 NL
van der Haar, Digital City boasted one of the most advanced appearances of an Internet City  worldwide (Fig. 9.3). By inventing “interaction design” in the process, software developers  and graphic designers were jointly engaging in a method to understand and create interaction.  All their efforts were directed at facilitating the thousands of digital citizens who  demanded services no one had thought of before. Not only interaction design but also  participatory design and community management had to be invented on the fly. It was a  constant conversation between developers, designers, and citizens exploring suggestions  immediately and generating an exponential growth of ideas and manifestations of online life.  Hackers, artists, and activists were crucial in the evolving dynamic.79
Citizens of Digital City were invited to create their own profile so others could see who was  online. One could become a visitor or an inhabitant of Digital City,
79 Interview with Stikker. See also Lovink, Geert Opkomst, Ondergang en Herrijzenis van de  Digitale Stad. Interview met Marleen Stikker. Online at http://amsterdam.nettime.org/Lists- Archives/nettime-nl-0103/msg00038.html. Accessed 29 Mar 2013.
9 How Amsterdam Invented the Internet
                                     *211*
which offered various interaction possibilities. Squares were thematically structured and  neighborhoods acquired character. Organizations including businesses, NGOs, and, for example,  the library and some newspapers could experiment with how to profile themselves and invent  services they could offer. Amsterdam City Council collaborated by offering their public and  management information systems to be included in Amsterdam Digital City. The overall city  plan provided a map which was redesigned several times, on which users could just click and  go. Users built houses, cafйs, gardens, shops, and even the first online cemetery called  “Momento Mori.”80 In what was called The Metro, a text-based MOO (Multi-User Domain, Object  Oriented), hundreds of users built this creative universe.81 Beurs TV, a local broadcaster  and organizer of the online elections in Digital City, managed for the first time to  incorporate chat sessions on live television.82
Amsterdam Digital City provided a platform in a user-friendly, visually attractive, and  Dutch-based environment to explore the potential of online communication. The graphical  interfaces and interaction software that were developed triggered the imagination of many  users. Besides online interaction, Digital City organized citizen meetings to discuss the  implications and effects of Digital City and the new netiquette. It also incorporated a wide  range of public events including parties, debates, and artistic experiments, to unlock the  potential of the connective platform. Digital City was a great experiment of fundamental  research into the future of the public domain. Being locked into the real city of Amsterdam,  it took the human scale as its conceptual ground, integrating online life with real events in  the city of Amsterdam. Whereas The WELL in the United States was a virtual community  established online which then began to meet in person, DDS originated in communities that  already existed outside the Internet and who experienced the online interaction as a welcome  contribution.83
For the emerging scene of digital artisans, Digital City served as a playground full of  inspiration, while the Dutch government founded the Netherlands Design Institute, whose  director John Thackara launched the Doors of Perception confer-ence.84 Inspired by the TED  conference and Siggraph, the leaders of the new designer generation gathered in Europe,  including prominent IT companies, consultancies, scholars, and designers to present the  latest software inventions. The Dutch digital scene went on display, while the conference  offered a platform to explore fundamental differences between the United States and Europe.
80 Created by Marjolein Ruyg.
81 Created by Michael van Eeden.
82 Beurs TV was initiated and directed by Nina Meilof.
83 This is in many ways comparable to the internet use in Trinidad highlighted by Slater,  Modernity under construction.
84Thackara launched the Doors of Perception Conference together with Willem Velthoven of  Mediamatic. This conference was moved to India after the Netherlands Design Institute closed.  See www.doorsofperception.com
                                     *212*
C. Nevejan and A. Badenoch
With the introduction of graphical interface, the Internet had suddenly become commercial. It  changed the political dynamics. Much discussion surrounding Digital City and what rapidly  became known as the Amsterdam Public Digital Culture has been a tale of one moment of  euphoria followed by decline before the project was pulled into the commercial domain.85 Such  narratives questioned the sustainability of open infrastructures while examining the  willingness and ability of Digital City’s organizers and administrators to maintain such  structures in light of corporate competition and sought to explain Digital City’s  transformation in the second half of the 1990s. Confronted with an increasingly commercial  environment, the organizers felt Digital City either had to reinvent itself or close shop. By  the late 1990s, the government no longer supported the creative industries. The Netherlands  Design Institute had to close its doors, causing the Netherlands to lose its position as  front-runner in the digital revolution and test country for many industries involved. When  Digital City decided to stop the site in 1999, many users felt the organization had no right  to do so; it was their city. The organizers felt they had no choice but to close the gates.86
Since 1993 and through 1994, Internet use had spread at a dazzling speed, and its  transformation into a commercial realm was becoming increasingly apparent. Some of the  original initiators saw the space for public research in which networked events and public  initiatives like Digital City offered scope for participatory development in the public  domain, shrinking fast. To protect this space where such public research could be funded and  designed, Paradiso and De Balie joined forces. Independent consultant Bert Mulder wrote an  analysis of the possibilities of starting an independent media lab. In December of 1994,  Stikker (De Balie) and Nevejan (Paradiso) founded the Society for Old and New Media, an  independent media lab for culture and the public domain.87 De Waag, a former city gate built  in the fifteenth century where Rembrandt painted his anatomy lesson in its Theatrum  Anatomicum, and located directly on the Nieuwmarkt, had been empty for over a decade. The  city was seeking bids for its redevelopment, and the Society for Old and New Media entered  the competition. It was funded and supported by two partners from culture (De Balie,  Paradiso), two from education (Rietveld Academy’s Sandberg Institute, the Utrecht School of  Fine Arts), and two from business (the cooperative Rabobank, media company Weekbladpers),  putting up a bid to create an institution to support public research into old and new media.  The city awarded the contract to the new foundation, rejecting several proposals from  commercial developers.
Although modeled on MIT’s Medialab in Boston, the Amsterdam initiative did not share its US  counterpart’s focus on commercial competitiveness. In the oldest medieval building in town,  the savviest technologies were gathered with an agenda defined by a civic perspective.  Because they were pushing technology as well as finding new creative uses, their agendas were  distinctly different. Whereas MIT
85This is definitely the narrative in Castells, Internet, 146-155; see also Rustema, Rise and  fall; Flint, DDS.
86 Interview with Stikker.
87 http://www.waag.org
9 How Amsterdam Invented the Internet
                                     *213*
Medialab made an application for individual children in a smart room full of sensors, the  Waag built a visual MOO for inner-city elementary schools, allowing children to learn to both  reading and writing plus art history at the same time. Debates between these different  approaches were heated. Since then, Waag Society has been a place of innovation, joining the  ranks of established media labs (and several MIT Medialab students came as apprentices to the  Waag). In the second half of the 1990s, Waag Society played a significant role in creating a  European network of independent media labs and became a founding partner of Sarai, a New  Delhi-based media lab.
Other media labs also joined the established ranks of digital arts and culture, while new  labs emerged as well: Submarine, Worm, Fabchannel, and more. As of 1996, the media labs  started to establish what is called the Virtual Platform, to better organize their lobbying  activities and benefit from each other’s experiences. They have taken joint political action  while developing their own individual work and identity. Mediamatic continues to create  award-winning exhibitions and performances that intervene in key cultural debates and has  also developed the widely used Anymeta community management system. V2 is an established  digital art platform and lab as well. STEIM invites many young artists to come and play and  collaborates closely with mostly international conservatories. Since 2001, the Dutch  government has supported digital culture, acknowledging e-culture as a discipline in its own  right. In 2012, the government decided to abolish these funds once again, arguing that  creative industries do not need public support.88
9.6	Conclusion
As we have shown here, the digital public culture of Amsterdam that Castells highlighted can  best be understood as an outgrowth of the public media culture pioneered in a range of  independent media centers. Their commitment to broad and popular access to media and active,  creative networking shaped the digital culture that emerged in the 1990s. Digital City is  indeed itself best viewed as such a media center, which focused all its experiments on the  new virtual environment in an attempt to revitalize the city’s culture. These media centers  came into existence within larger cultural movements in which youth culture, intellectual  underground, and political activism played an important role, in turn shaping their  particular approach to the emerging digital media. Media centers functioned locally and  trans-locally, making bridges between Eastern and Western Europe and beyond.
Because media centers were part of larger social movements, it is not surprising to see that  crucial roles in the development of Europe’s digital culture included nontechnical experts.  Paradiso’s network events and Amsterdam Digital City set an agenda in which technology’s  impact on society was at the forefront in a
88The current political debates can be followed at the Netherlands Council for Culture and  the Arts: http://www. cultuur.nl/
                                     *214*
C. Nevejan and A. Badenoch
collaborative effort by technical and nontechnical people alike. These actors’ emphasis on  the questions “What is this stuff for?” and “How will it enhance our lives?” had a deep  impact on how the digital culture emerged in those first years. The digital culture that  emerged in the United States, where a community like The WELL was built on the Whole Earth  Catalogue, has also been defined by such nonindustrial and mostly cultural developments.89 It  has sharpened and deepened the imagination of the first adaptors. Or, for example, Apple’s  Educational Object Index in the mid-1990s, building on a large movement of learning  innovation, has influenced ideas about online learning that have only now become commercially  available.
Janet Abbate has stressed that the title of her study Inventing the Internet points to a  technology that has been repeatedly reinvented by the actors and shaped the Internet’s  path.90 We have followed a similar line of argument here, but expanding our focus beyond the  developments within the military (e.g., ARPAnet), scientific (e.g., CERN), and commercial  communities that are the standard reference points of most Internet histories. Instead, we  highlight the local mediators who adapted the Internet along different lines, pushing for  universal free access, political engagement with the city and the world, and for a civil  society with broad participation including state and countercultural actors. As one  contemporary observer remarked, Digital City was the result of a “golden formula: gather  professional activity-organizers around a table with hackers who understand all about network  technology.”91 Such a “golden formula” emerged from a social and technological networking  style that characterized the city. Alternative networks negotiated and cooperated with public  institutions and industry in a political arena, where state, market, and civil society worked  in close harmony to manage conflict and coordinate change. Radical behavior, as long as it  conforms to certain social rules, will be engaged with rather than criminalized or excluded.  Social-democratic city councils fostered such politics of consensus, turning Amsterdam into a  relatively safe playground to explore new media and new forms of community. Digital City, in  short, represented a broad social coalition and unique civic participation.
Fixing historical focus on the relationship between digital development and specific urban  cultures in Amsterdam has highlighted three aspects of the story. Firstly, the historical  focus shows the importance of a local youth and alternative culture in Amsterdam. The digital  culture emerging in the early 1990s was rooted in the independent printing and broadcasting  cultures that blossomed in 1980s Amsterdam. These were all connected with local activist  communities involved in European and global networks, such as squatter movements, antinuclear  movements, and other
89 See WELL’s website at www.well.com; Katie Hafner. 1997. The epic saga of the well. Wired  Magazine 5(5, May). http://www.wired.eom/wired/archive/5.05/ff_well_pr.html. Accessed 27 Sept  2014.
90Abbate, Inventing, 6.
91 Marianne van den Boomen. 1995. “Digitale Steden en virtuele Gemeenschappen,” excerpt from  Marianne van den Boomen. In Internet-ABC voor vrouwen. Amsterdam: Institut voor Politiek en  Publiek. http://www.xs4all.nl~boom/hs8.html. Accessed 15 June 2011.
9 How Amsterdam Invented the Internet
                                     *215*
social justice movements. Secondly, we highlight how actors whose core expertise lay not in  the traditional sense of technological realms but with strong visions for the future of  digital technologies, which played an important role in shaping the Internet’s material,  institutional, and cultural infrastructure in the Netherlands and Europe. While noting the  roles of major institutions and actors connected to them, as well as that of technological  amateurs—the ever-present boys with toys—this story also shows how community, governmental,  and industry actors played a vital part in creating a media infrastructure.92 Thirdly, we  point to the important role of public events in constructing and designing communication  infrastructures. Networked events are moments whereby design—as described here—or by  accident, a communication structure is created, whereby actors are made meaningfully aware of  their connections.93 At such moments of linking, both human actors and technologies perform,  confirming and/or transforming the meaning of the connections for those who witness the  event. At events such as the Galactic Hacker Party and the Seropositive Ball, and the hacker  camping events (which continue to this day), computer networks were placed literally center  stage to allow participants to experience the potential of the new technologies for  addressing issues (social, political, and personal) they were already involved in.94 The  shared, witnessed, and collaborative first-time experience of new ways of communicating or  creating and accessing vital information had a major impact on the participants’ sense of  their own capacity to intervene. This is very different to the hacker culture of garages and  back rooms stressed in many histories of computer innovation, in that it focuses on a shared,  public experience. Likewise, the history of The WELL is defined by its local roots in the San  Francisco Bay area and is known through its monthly parties. Amsterdam Digital City hosted  very dynamic meetings with its citizens. People sharing firsttime digital network experiences  resulted not only in an exponential growth of their imagination as well as a sense of realism  of the new opportunities.
92 For the Dutch case, see Veraart, Vormgevers, 83. For a longer-term communication  perspective, especially the key role of radio amateurs in both constructing and subverting  the development of state infrastructures, see Susan J. Douglas. 2004 [1999]. Listening in:  Radio and the American imagination. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press; Onno de Wit.  1998. Telefonie in Nederland, 1877-1940. Opkomst en ontwikkeling van eengrootschalig system.  Amsterdam: Otto Cramwinckel, Adrian Johns. 2010. Death of a pirate: British radio and the  making of the information age. New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
93 See Nevejan, Presence, 102-104, 128; Alexander Badenoch and Andreas Fickers. 2010.  Introduction: Europe materializing? Toward a transnational history of infrastructures. In  Materializing Europe: Transnational infrastructures and the Project of Europe, ed. Alexander  Badenoch and Andreas Fickers, 1-26. Basingstoke: Palgrave; Andreas Fickers, and Susan  Lommers. 2010. Eventing Europe: Broadcasting and the mediated performances of Europe,  respectively. In Materializing Europe: Transnational infrastructures and the Project of  Europe, ed. Alexander Badenoch and Andreas Fickers, 225-251. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
94 Hacker camps now occur every 4 years in the Netherlands and have included “Hacking in  Progress” (1997), “Hackers at Large” (2001), “What the Hack”(2005), “Hacking at Random”  (2009), and “Observe, Hack, Make” (2013).
                                     *216*
C. Nevejan and A. Badenoch
Bibliography
Abbate, Janet. 1999. Inventing the Internet. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Abbate, Janet. 2010. Privatizing the Internet: Competing visions and chaotic events, 1987- 1995. IEEE Annals of the History of Computing 31(1): 10-22.
Adilkno [The Foundation for the Advancement of Illegal Knowledge]. 1994. Cracking the  Movement: Squatting Beyond the Media. Trans. Laura Martz. New York: Autonomedia. http://  thing.desk.nl/bilwet/Cracking/general.html. Last accessed 27 Sept 2011.
Anders, Freia. 2010. Wohnraum, Freiraum, Widerstand. Die Formierung der Autonomen in den  Konflikten um Hausbesetzungen Anfang der achtziger Jahre. In Das alternative Milieu.  Antibьrgerlicher Lebensstil und linke Politik in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland und Europa  1968-1983, ed. Sven Reichard and Detlef Siegfried, 473-498. Gцttingen: Wallstein Verlag.
Badenoch, Alexander, and Andreas Fickers. 2010. Introduction: Europe materializing? Toward a  transnational history of infrastructures. In Materializing Europe: Transnational  infrastructures and the Project of Europe, ed. Alexander Badenoch and Andreas Fickers, 1-26.  Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Berners-Lee, Tim. 2000. Weaving the Web: The original design and ultimate destiny of the  World Wide Web. New York: HarperBusiness.
Castells, Manuel. 2001. The Internet galaxy: Reflections on the Internet, business, and  society, 146. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ceruzzi, Paul E. 2003 [1998]. A history of modern computing. Cambridge, MA/London: MIT Press.
de Certeau, Michel. 1984. The practice of everyday life. Berkeley: University of California  Press.
de Wit, Onno. 1998. Telefonie in Nederland, 1877-1940. Opkomst en ontwikkeling van eengroot- schalig system. Amsterdam: Otto Cramwinckel.
Debord, Guy. 1977. Society of the spectacle. Detroit: Black & Red.
Denker, Kai. 2014. Heroes yet criminals of the German computer revolution. In Hacking Europe.  From computer cultures to demoscenes, ed. Gerard Alberts and Ruth Oldenziel, 167-188. New  York: Springer.
Douglas, Susan J. 2004 [1999]. Listening in: Radio and the American imagination. Minneapolis:  University of Minnesota Press.
Duivenvoorden, Eric. 2000. Een voet tussen de deur. Geschiedenis van de kraakbeweging 1964- 1999. Amsterdam: De Arbeiderspers.
Fickers, Andreas, and Susan Lommers. 2010. Eventing Europe: Broadcasting and the mediated  performances of Europe. In Materializing Europe: Transnational infrastructures and the  Project of Europe, ed. Alexander Badenoch and Andreas Fickers, 225-251. Basingstoke:  Palgrave.
Flint, Joost. 2004. DDS - 10 jaar anders. http://www.dds.nl/downloads/achtergrondartikel.pdf.  Accessed 16 July 2011.
Hafner, Katie. 1997. The epic saga of the well. Wired Magazine 5(5, May).  http://www.wired.com/ wired/archive/5.05/ff_well_pr.html. Accessed 27 Sept 2014.
Hanneke. 1993. Wet computercriminaliteit. Hack-Tic 20-21(1993): 4-11.
Jankowski, Nick. 1988. Community television in Amsterdam access to participation in and use  of the “Lokale Omroep Bijlmermeer”. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Johns, Adrian. 2010. Death of a pirate: British radio and the making of the information age.  New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Kleve, P., R.V. Mulder, and C. van Noortwijk. 2010. ICT Criminaliteit. In Criminaliteit en  crimi-naliteitsbestrijding in Nederland, ed. Erwin Roelof Muller et al., 259-288. Deventer:  Kluwer.
Kloosterman, A.M., H.J. Rossel, and J.P. van Stempvoort. 2008. Hoofdlijnen in het huurrecht:  met vragen en antwoorden. Deventer: Kluwer.
Koch, Karel. 1992. Introduction: The camcorder revolution. In N5M Zapbook: Working papers,  ed. Jeroen van Bergeijk, Geke van Dijk, Karel Koch, and Bas Raimakers, 29. Amsterdam:  Paradiso.
Levy, Stephen. 1984. Hackers: Heroes of the computer revolution. Garden City, NY: Anchor  Press/ Doubleday.
9 How Amsterdam Invented the Internet
                                     *217*
Lovink, Geert. 1992. The theory of mixing: An inventory of free radio techniques in  Amsterdam. Mediamatic Magazine 6(4). http://www.mediamatic.net/page/5750/en?lang=en. Accessed  21 May 2011.
Lovink, Geert. 1995. ‘Listen or Die’: A history of the punk hard core pirate station ‘Radio  Death’, Amsterdam 1985-1987. Bilwet. http://thing.desk.nl/bilwet/TXT/DOOD.ENG.txt. Last  accessed 27 Sept 2011.
Lovink, Geert, Rik Delhaas, and Laura Martz (eds.). 1991. Wetware. Amsterdam: De Balie.  Marcus, Greil. 2001 [1989]. Lipstick traces: A secret history of the twentieth century.  London: Faber & Faber.
Mollema, Kornelis I.J., et al. 1993. Computercriminaliteit: De wetgeving, de gevolgen voor  bedri-jven en de accountant. Deventer: Kluwer.
Nelson, Mark M. 1989. Nerds of the world unite - And defend their right to hack. Wall Street  Journal Europe, August 7.
Nevejan, Caroline. 2007. Presence and the design of trust. PhD Thesis, University of  Amsterdam. Rudolf, Ralf. 1988. Erste Eindrьcke zum CCC Congress ’88. Die Datenschleuder 28- 29(1988) at http://www.offiziere.ch/trust-us/ds/28/010_Erste_Eindruecke.html. Last accessed  July 2011. Rustema, Reinder. 2001. The rise and fall of DDS. MA thesis, University of  Amsterdam.
Segaller, Stephen. 1998. Nerds 2.0.1: A brief history of the Internet. New York: TV Books.
Slater, Don. 2003. Modernity under construction: Building the Internet in Trinidad. In  Modernity and technology, ed. Philip Brey, Thomas J. Misa, and Andrew Feenberg, 139-160.  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Stappers, James, Frank Olderaan, and Pieter de Wit. 1991. The Netherlands: Emergence of a new  medium. In The people’s voice: Local radio and television in Europe, ed. Nick Jankowski, Ole  Prehn, and James Stappers, 90-103. London: John Libbey. van Bergeijk, Jeroen, Geke van Dijk,  Karel Koch, and Bas Raimakers (eds.). 1992. N5M Zapbook: Working papers. Amsterdam: Paradiso.  http://www.tacticalmediafiles.net/TMF_documents/ N5Mzapbook.pdf, esp. 25. Last accessed 6 Oct  2011. van den Boomen, Marianne. 1995. “Digitale Steden en virtuele Gemeenschappen,” excerpt  from Marianne van den Boomen. In Internet-ABC voor vrouwen. Amsterdam: Institut voor Politiek  en Publiek. http://www.xs4all.nl~boom/hs8.html. Accessed 15 June 2011. van Tijen, Tjebbe.  1966. 1966: Provo’s Witte Huizenplan/White House Plan of Provo movement. Witplan.  http://witplan.wordpress.com/1966/04/25/provos-witte-huizenplanwhite-house-plan-ofprovo- movement/. Accessed 31 Mar 2013. van Tijen, Tjebbe. 1990. Europa tegen de stroom. De Gids  153(6): 466-471 [English translation available online Going against the grain, Europe against  the current. http://www.imaginarymuseum. org/ETS/ETSeng.html. Accessed 30 Jan 2014] van  Tijen, Tjebbe. 1993. A context for collecting the new media. In Next 5Minutes Video  Catalogue, catalogue of videotapes shown during the festival on tactical television held in  Paradiso Amsterdam, 8-10 January 1993, ed. Bas Raijmakers and Tjebbe van Tijen. Amsterdam:  International Institute of Social History. Online at  http://socialhistory.org/sites/default/files/ docs/collecting-new-media.pdf. Accessed 1 Apr  2013. van Tijen, Tjebbe. 1992. Vrije culturele ruimtes. In Gebroken wit: politiek van de  kleine verhalen, ed. Mascarpone, Irene Janze, et al. Amsterdam: Ravijn. [Available online as  Tjebbe van Tijen. 2004. Vrije Culturele Ruimtes. http://imaginarymuseum.org/VKULT. Last  accessed 16 July 2011]
Veraart, Frank. 2008c. Vormgevers van Persoonlijk Computergebruik: De ontwikkeling van  computers voor kleingebruikers in Nederland 1970-1990. PhD thesis, TU Eindhoven.
Vlap, Annelies. 2011. Internet van en voor Nederland. Het verhaal van 25 jaar .nl, in 25 jaar  .nl. In Bex*communicatie. Anniversary Publication SIDN, 30-40. Arnhem: Stichting Internet  Domeinregistratie Nederland.
Chapter 10
Users in the Dark: The Development of a User-Controlled Technology in the Czech Wireless  Network Community
Johan Sцderberg
10.1	Introduction
About 10 years ago, if you happened to be standing on a rooftop in a Czech town looking out  into the night sky, your attention might well have been drawn to some red lights glowing on  the horizon. Perhaps an association to cyberpunk would have crossed your mind. Such aesthetic  sensibilities were indeed cultivated by the members of the wireless network community who  built the light-transmitting devices. Where the onlooker saw red light beams, there were in  fact streams of data crossing back and forth over the rooftops. Many of the wireless network  activists were students living in rented flats in large tower blocks. Some of them had  elderly neighbors who did not share their appreciation for cyberpunk aesthetic. Furthermore,  those neighbors tended to be the movers and shakers of local housing committees. They had the  authority, in other words, to tell the young residents to take down the devices from the  buildings. This happened frequently enough to motivate the wireless network community to  start looking for a technical solution to the dispute. They came up with a modified version  of the device where the data transmission took place in the infrared as opposed to the red  region of the electromagnetic spectrum. The technical performance with regard to range,  accuracy, and interference from rain and fog was roughly the same for both kinds of light.  The problem of interference from neighbors, however, was much reduced with infrared light.  The stream of data could now flow, cunningly, behind the backs of unwitting neighbors.
The light-transmitting device was called “Ronja,” an abbreviation for Reasonable Optical Near  Joint Access. Invented in 2001 by Karel Kulhavy, the technology was widely used in the Czech  Republic for about 5 years. Ronja offered the cheapest,
J. Sцderberg (*)
Gцteborgs Universitet, Gцteborg, Sweden
Laboratoire Techniques, Territoires et Sociйtйs/Institut Francilien Innovation et Sociйtй,  Universitй Paris-Est, Paris, France e-mail: johan.soderberg@sts.gu.se
G. Alberts and R. Oldenziel (eds.), Hacking Europe. From Computer Cultures	219
to Demoscenes, History of Computing, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4471-5493-8_10,
© Springer-Verlag London 2014