THE WORK OF IDEOLOGY
The mundane and at the same time mysterious fact of life, work, has forced its way hack into the spotlight of public attention. Capitalism, which for so long has attempted to conceal what goes on in the act of commodity labor, now puts the relationship between the worker and the means of production up for display. Tts accomplices, the unions and the sociologists, have joined in the examination, flut all the current interest in this subject has nothing to do with mere curiosity; it is a direct result of the acute social crisis faced by world capitalism — workers everywhere have expressed a desire to put an end to work. The actions of the proletariat have forced capitalism to reveal what it had previously kept secret — no one believes in work any more. This revelation has been accompanied by an attempt to restore order to the labor process; everywhere the world's bosses arc implementing new techniques of labor management, “The reform of labor and not its abolition" is the watchword for the ruling classes of all countries.

Pehr Gyllenhammar. president of Sweden's Volvo, measuring morale on the assembly line.

While formerly capitalism reduced the worker to a mere appendage of the machine, today it is required to "humanize" the work process. Already, new programs designed to restore "vitality" to the act of work are being initiated by capitalism from Sweden to the United States. The traditional assembly line (and its ideology, Taylorism Ms being replaced by work-situations in which workers are allowed to participate in the planning and execution of production; capitalism has also tried to restore "meaning” to the worker's job by diversifying the tasks he must perform. In many areas, these "job enrichment” programs have swept the initiative for reform away from the unions and other self·' proclaimed representatives of the proletariat.
The trade unions, permanent and necessary partners with management in the maintenance of commodity production, have been carried along in the reformist tide and have come to accept the idea of "workers’ control” as a stop-gap to the militant actions of their constituencies. In this movement, the U.S. trade unions lag behind their bureaucratic counterparts elsewhere; the more advanced trade unions (the Canadian CNTU, the French CFDT) have made “workers’ control” an important part of their programs — the ex-priests of the CFDT have even endorsed the concept of "self-management.” All of this parvenu “radicalism” is only meant to strengthen the position of the unions; they have become militant only to keep some measure of control over their members. Any kind of "workers’ control” implemented by the unions will be carried out under their tutelage; this will be the rewrard offered by management if they are able to involve the workers in their schemes once again.
In the wake of all this, the various left-overs of Leninism have been put in the position of trying to catch up with a fast-changing reality. They too have begun to modernize, appending a call for workers’ control to their ideologies. Gramsci's modernist Jacobinism (vanguard party cum “factory councils”) has been dusted off and declared serviceable in order to give the Leninist party an appearance of "democracy.” Abandoning the archaic models of Russian or Chinese stato-capitalism, the more sophisticated Leninists have taken their cue from more flexible systems of bureaucracy such as Yugoslavia, where the Party has institutionalized sham "workers' councils” that organize the particulars of commodity production, CerLain Trotskyist groups, especially in England, have been in the forefront of this new trend, basing their entire conception of “revolution” around workers’ control and advocating "self-management” between their predictable calls for "correct leadership” to guide the struggle.
As can be seen, the reform of work has also been the work of ideology. Even the most radical slogans, once stripped of their content, have entered the service of counter-revolution. Of these, workers' control has probably drawn the most overtime from capitalism; in cloaking simple reformism under a radical guise it has been in the forefront of the recuperation of current struggles. The ideologists of workers' control have attempted to define the terrain
of struggle in advance; workers will assume 'control' over the means of production by including demands for increased worker participation in decision-making capacities along with the usual demands for higher wages, etc. Through a quantitative accumulation of '‘qualitative victories," the gradual "withering away” of the bosses’ power, the workers will learn to run production os it is. This "radical” step is nothing more than a more sophisticated version of the present work relationship; once the more oppressive features of the system have been eliminated, commodity production, under the administration of workers' control, will function more smoothly.
In attempting to impose themselves as the adjutants to the movement of the proletariat, the ideologists of workers’ control have revealed themselves for what they are — the future masters of a more advanced alienation. The workers' controllers are just that; their idea of proletarian 'democracy' is nothing more than a further step in the control of the proletariat. Even the most advanced ideologists of workers' control (Gorit, Mallet) admit this; the idiot Gorz talks of workers' councils, “revolutionary” reform, and "cultural revolution” all in one breath. By integrating workers more fully into the production process, workers' control affords the proletariat the ability to participate in the construction of their own alienation. "Participation” cannot be confused with self-management; the mere occupation of the existing order of production without its transformation can be nothing more than a substitution of bosses. From the old robber-baron capitalist to the joint union-management committees, the principle of authority is the same.
While workers’ control has begun a revitalization of the unions, both bringing them back into focus as a center of "working class activity” and providing a suitably "democratic" environment for their long-needed restructuring, certain groups (Solidarity, ICO, Hoot & Branch) have already advanced to a critique of unionism and its attendant, open reformism. These groups have sufficient intelligence to recognize the real movement of the proletariat in such autonomous acts as wildcat strikes and sabotage. Yet while they correctly see the form in which the class struggle is actually taking place, the true implications of this activity remain beyond them. Like the workers' controllists they can comprehend the proletarian revolt currently developing throughout the wrorld only as a rebellion against the particular forms of the political and economic organization of capitalist society. Failing to understand the proletariat as the negation of the total production of life in bourgeois society, these “councilists” center their aims around the rearrangement of productive life. Because they recognize the need for a revolution to achieve their aims, they have successfully placed themselves beyond workers’ control; because they only aim to have immediately what the workers’ controllists want to develop into a long bureaucratic march, they are only one step beyond.
These "councilists" have not moved forward one inch from the perspective elaborated in Anton Pannekoek's Workers' Councils, which attempted in 1940 to assess the experience of workers’ councils as revolutionary forms. Pannekoek's radical method of deriving the new organization of the new world from "the real conditions and needs of present work and present workers’’ allowed him to go far beyond the rigid perspective of "Marxism," and to elaborate the first coherent theory of councils and councilist organization. But Pannekoek’s radicalism is totally lost to his self-proclaimed "councilist” inheritors. Lacking a critique of modern society, they have only been able to develop a pale imitation of what Pannekoek bad already done. In short, they have succeeded in building an ideology out of Pannekoek's theoretical contribution ; detached from the movement of the proletariat as it is unfolding, the concept of workers’ councils is erected as an ideal to which reality is supposed to conform.
This idealization of the council form is reflected in the organization of the various "councilist" groups. Unable to understand the ongoing revolutionary processes at work in society, they devote most of their time to documenting details surrounding workers’ movements of the past. Solidarity has effectively made a career out of this, publishing pamphlets on virtually every proletarian revolution since the Commune, with the notable exception of the Spanish Revolution. Here, a closely guarded silence is maintained; the major role played in Spain by anarchists (whose English imitators constitute Solidarity’s chief ideological rivals) necessitates that the whole affair be deleted from Solidarity's "history” of the proletariat- Other than providing the proletariat with these selected abstract models for revolution, Solidarity exists in an organizational Umbo, waiting for the workers to do something so that its isolated groups of militants can be of more concrete service. In the interim, an "ongoing debate” is proclaimed, which in this case can only reveal the eclectic nature of their ideology and serve to justify such "temporary” expedients of working at the unions “from the inside” and forming on alliance with the American follow-ers of Daniel De Leon (whose original contribution to socialism was that it could be achieved by passing a constitutional amendment).
The French group I.C.O. (Workers’ Information Correspondence) has avoided the militantism of other groups by doing nothing-, their concept of 'federation' is nothing more than a federated discussion of "general ideas." I.C.O.'s non-organization is a measure of its own impotence; it exists as a monthly “information bulletin." Its answer to traditional leftist manipulation is a purely formal democracy of speech, where everything can he said so that nothing has to be decided. The ostensible purpose of I.C.O. being to “explicate situations in which the workers realize more or less rapidly that nothing fundamental has changed,” their worst nightmare is that something might really happen. Incapable of acting themselves, they imagine the proletariat to be in the same miserable state: following May ’68 in France, they published a pamphlet which meticulously explained why a revolutionary situation did not exist.
Root & Branch, the latest addition to the “councilist” camp, has assembled its ideology by taking the ‘best’ of everyone eise’s, I.C.O/s "mass strike'' is combined with Solidarity's concept of organization, added to a bit of economism, and finally joined together with selected Mew Left mystifications [emphasis hfere on the “counter-culture”). Hoot & Branch has always been part of the "Movement"; despite occasional praises for fellow “councilists," it actively shares an affinity with avant-garde Movement groups such as Liberation Magazine (with special affection reserved for that dean of labor reform, Staughton Lynd), Thus it is hardly surprising that Hoot & Branch's Jeremy lirecher, pop ideologist published by Rolling Stone, attempts in his book on the American proletariat to integrate councils into the framework of the Mew Left, This custodian of proletarian history renounces all precision, and sees coundliat tendencies in struggles everywhere — in student strikes and wildcat strikes
alike. Brecher's analysis is not confined to the United States — he attempts to elaborate an international perspective as well with short synopses of workers’ movements in Russia (1917), Italy (1920), and Spain (1936). These “interesting1* and "impressive“ events are even specially packaged: the apparently dull subject of workers’ councils is enhanced with more exciting facts and figures. Where discussion of councils is necessary, they are presented under various euphemisms (“factory committees,“ “factory councils," “worker»1 committees,” “organs of workers’ control,1' “communes," etc.). But Brecher does not pretend to analyze the function of the councils as the forms of the self-organization of the proletariat — he openly admits his role as historian, and ends his book with a touching plea for intellectual object! vity.
The sociological perspective with which the “councilist" ideologists view the past is employed by them to describe the present as well. Seeing revolutionary activity only as a series of “events" in which the proletariat participates as a “mass," the "counciiiats" fail to perceive the subjective dynamic of revolution. Although they claim to have gone beyond Leninism, they continue to sec revolution as proceeding from an external logic, a response to a “social crisis" of capitalism which will "educate” the workers about the need to revolt. Yet while the ’’councilists“ fail to comprehend the radical content of current proletarian activity, they nonetheless attempt to append themselves to the workers’ struggles, in the hope that these struggles will develop into something. They invent a mechanical formula for the future: a quantitative progression of wildcat strikes is envisioned as developing into a “mass strike" and finally into revolution. Consciousness in this “struggle" is dependent solely on the numbers of workers involved; as the ranks of this idyllic movement grow, workers are to understand that they are fighting no longer as isolated individuals but as a class. United around the sterile slogans of “solidarity" and collective "responsibility, ” the workers will gradually take over the means of production; Strike committees will “naturally" tend to become workers councils, which will organize things “rationally” and provide for everyone's needs. The economist nature of this view of councils even leaves it open to a "critique" by advanced Leninists such as the Italian Baldi, who “proves" the need for a vanguard party by maintaining that councils only reproduce the form of capitalist society by occupying the means of production that have been organized by the bourgcoisie.
What brings on the downfall of the “councilists” forms only the starting point for any authentic revolutionary movement. Just as political economy has succeeded in dominating all aspects of life, it must be answered by a movement wrhich aims to transform all social relations. Workers' councils can reproduce capitalist society, and will in fact do so to the degree that they accept the artificial distinctions of politics, economics, etc. IVut the solution to the possibility of such social reproduction begins with what the "councilists" will never understand — the refusal to reproduce the conditions of one's own alienation in the act of commodity labor, a refusal which is already present in the proletarian struggles taking place today. The only justification for the councils will he as the means by which each individual can make his  desire to live free from all restrictions a permanent reality.
The struggle against all hierarchy must recognize itself as the struggle against the hierarchy of ideas employed by the bourgeoisie to maintain its world- Ideology is today the essential defense mechanism of spectacular society — false consciousness, however radical it may appear, is the palace guard of the old world. The destruction of this last harrier of mediation will be crucial for the revolutionary proletariat if it is to establish its authority; ideological as well as physical domination must be abolished by the councils through the direct translation of thought info practice. The opposition between theory and ideology is no mere academic dispute; it is itself part of the class-struggle and can be resolved only by the actions of the proletariat. The autonomy of theory can only be established by an autonomous proletarian power.
If we have shown the ideologists of workers' control and councilism for what they, in fact, are, it is not to offer ourselves and our theory as some sort of idealized replacement. We have merely shown what stands in the way of the proletariat and the radical tasks it must perform before it begins to create a world of its own. We are not mere partisans of workers’ councils; what separates us from the "councilist" ideologists is our desire to extend and in fact supersede the past accomplishments of workers' councils. In speaking of a past tradition, we do so not out of some romantic attachment to a bygone era of proletarian revolution, but because the experience of these instances of councilist power form a practical basis for future revolution.
